
@@PAGE 1@@
THE PROBABILITY OF BACKTEST
OVERFITTING
David H. Bailey ∗ Jonathan M. Borwein †
Marcos L´ opez de Prado‡ Qiji Jim Zhu§
February 27, 2015
Revised version: February 2015
∗Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (retired), 1 Cyclotron Road, Berke-
ley, CA 94720, USA, and Research Fellow at the University of California,
Davis, Department of Computer Science. E-mail: david@davidhbailey.com; URL:
http://www.davidhbailey.com
†Laureate Professor of Mathematics at University of Newcastle, Callaghan NSW
2308, Australia, and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, the Australian
Academy of Science, the American Mathematical Society and the AAAS. E-mail:
jonathan.borwein@newcastle.edu.au; URL: http://www.carma.newcastle.edu.au/jon
‡Senior Managing Director at Guggenheim Partners, New York, NY 10017, and Re-
search Aﬃliate at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
E-mail: lopezdeprado@lbl.gov; URL: http://www.QuantResearch.info
§Professor, Department of Mathematics, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI
49008, USA. Email: zhu@wmich.edu; URL: http://homepages.wmich.edu/~zhu/
1
@@PAGE 2@@
THE PROBABILITY OF BACKTEST OVERFITTING
Abstract
Many investment ﬁrms and portfolio managers rely on backtests
(i.e., simulations of performance based on historical market data) to
select investment strategies and allocate capital. Standard statistical
techniques designed to prevent regression overﬁtting, such as hold-
out, tend to be unreliable and inaccurate in the context of investment
backtests. We propose a general framework to assess the probabil-
ity of backtest overﬁtting (PBO). We illustrate this framework with
speciﬁc generic, model-free and nonparametric implementations in the
context of investment simulations, which implementations we call com-
binatorially symmetric cross-validation (CSCV). We show that CSCV
produces reasonable estimates of PBO for several useful examples.
Keywords. Backtest, historical simulation, probability of backtest over-
ﬁtting, investment strategy, optimization, Sharpe ratio, minimum backtest
length, performance degradation.
JEL Classiﬁcation: G0, G1, G2, G15, G24, E44.
AMS Classiﬁcation: 91G10, 91G60, 91G70, 62C, 60E.
Acknowledgements. We are indebted to the Editor and three anony-
mous referees who peer-reviewed this article as well as a related article for the
Notices of the American Mathematical Society [1]. We are also grateful to
Tony Anagnostakis (Moore Capital), Marco Avellaneda (Courant Institute,
NYU), Peter Carr (Morgan Stanley, NYU), Paul Embrechts (ETH Z¨ urich),
Matthew D. Foreman (University of California, Irvine), Ross Garon (SAC
Capital), Jeﬀrey S. Lange (Guggenheim Partners), Attilio Meucci (KKR,
NYU), Natalia Nolde (University of British Columbia and ETH Z¨ urich) and
Riccardo Rebonato (PIMCO, University of Oxford) for many useful and
stimulating exchanges.
Sponsorship. Research supported in part by the Director, Oﬃce of Com-
putational and Technology Research, Division of Mathematical, Informa-
tion, and Computational Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy, under
contract number DE-AC02-05CH11231 and by various Australian Research
Council grants.
2
@@PAGE 3@@
“This was our paradox: No course of action could be determined by
a rule, because every course of action can be made to accord with the
rule.” Ludwig Wittgenstein [36].
1 Introduction
Modern investment strategies rely on the discovery of patterns that can be
quantiﬁed and monetized in a systematic way. For example, algorithms can
be designed to proﬁt from phenomena such as “momentum,” i.e., the ten-
dency of many securities to exhibit long runs of proﬁts or losses, beyond
what could be expected from securities following a martingale. One advan-
tage of this systematization of investment strategies is that those algorithms
are amenable to “backtesting.” A backtest is a historical simulation of how
an algorithmic strategy would have performed in the past. Backtests are
valuable tools because they allow researchers to evaluate the risk/reward
proﬁle of an investment strategy before committing funds.
Recent advances in algorithmic research and high-performance comput-
ing have made it nearly trivial to test millions and billions of alternative
investment strategies on a ﬁnite dataset of ﬁnancial time series. While these
advances are undoubtedly useful, they also present a negative and often si-
lenced side-eﬀect: The alarming rise of false positives in related academic
publications (The Economist [32]). This paper introduces a computational
procedure for detecting false positives in the context of investment strategy
research.
To motivate our study, consider a researcher who is investigating an al-
gorithm to proﬁt from momentum. Perhaps the most popular technique
among Commodity Trading Advisors (CTAs) is to use so-called crossing-
moving averages to detect a change of trend in a security 1. Even for the
simplest case, there are at least ﬁve parameters that the researcher can ﬁt:
Two sample lengths for the moving averages, entry threshold, exit threshold
and stop-loss. The number of combinations that can be tested over thou-
sands of securities is in the billions. For each of those billions of backtests,
we could estimate its Sharpe ratio (or any other performance statistic), and
determine whether that Sharpe ratio is indeed statistically signiﬁcant at
a conﬁdence level of 95%. Although this approach is consistent with the
Neyman-Pearson framework of hypothesis testing, it is highly likely that
false positives will emerge with a probability greater than 5%. The reason
1Several technical tools are based on this principle, such as the Moving Average Con-
vergence Divergence (MACD) indicator.
3
@@PAGE 4@@
is that a 5% false positive probability only holds when we apply the test
exactly once. However, we are applying the test on the same data multiple
times (indeed, billions of times), making the emergence of false positives
almost certain.
The core question we are asking is this: What constitutes a legitimate
empirical ﬁnding in the context of investment research? This may appear to
be a rather philosophical question, but it has important practical implica-
tions, as we shall see later in our discussion. Financial discoveries typically
involve identifying a phenomenon with low signal-to-noise ratio, where that
ratio is driven down as a result of competition. Because the signal is weak,
a test of hypothesis must be conducted on a large sample as a way of assess-
ing the existence of a phenomenon. This is not the typical case in scientiﬁc
areas where the signal-to-noise ratio is high. By way of example, consider
the apparatus of classical mechanics, which was developed centuries before
Neyman and Pearson proposed their theory of hypothesis testing. Newton
did not require statistical testing of his gravitation theory, because the signal
from that phenomenon dominates the noise.
The question of ‘legitimate empirical ﬁndings’ is particularly troubling
when researchers conduct multiple tests. The probability of ﬁnding false
positives increases with the number of tests conducted on the same data
(Miller [25]). As each researcher carries out millions of regressions (Sala-i-
Martin [28]) on a ﬁnite number of independent datasets without controlling
for the increased probability of false positives, some researchers have con-
cluded that ‘most published research ﬁndings are false’ (see Ioannidis [17]).
Furthermore, it is common practice to use this computational power to
calibrate the parameters of an investment strategy in order to maximize
its performance. But because the signal-to-noise ratio is so weak, often
the result of such calibration is that parameters are chosen to proﬁt from
past noise rather than future signal. The outcome is an overﬁt backtest
[1]. Scientists at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory have developed
an online tool to demonstrate this phenomenon. This tool generates a time
series of pseudorandom returns, and then calibrates the parameters of an
optimal monthly strategy (i.e., the sequence of days of the month to be long
the security, and the sequence of days of the month to be short). After
a few hundred iterations, it is trivial to ﬁnd highly proﬁtable strategies
in-sample, despite the small number of parameters involved. Performance
out-of-sample is, of course, utterly disappointing. The tool is available at
http://datagrid.lbl.gov/backtest/index.php.
Backtests published in academic or practitioners’ publications almost
never declare the number of trials involved in a discovery. Because those
4
@@PAGE 5@@
researchers have most likely not controlled for the number of trials, it is
highly probable that their ﬁndings constitute false positives ([1, 3]). Even
though researchers at academic and investment institutions may be aware
of these problems, they have little incentive to expose them. Whether their
motivations are to receive tenure or raise funds for a new systematic fund,
those researchers would rather ignore this problem and make their investors
or managers believe that backtest overﬁtting does not aﬀect their results.
Some may even pretend that they are controlling for overﬁtting using inap-
propriate techniques, exploiting the ignorance of their sponsors, as we will
see later on when discussing the ‘hold-out’ method.
The goal of our paper is to develop computational techniques to control
for the increased probability of false positives as the number of trials in-
creases, applied to the particular ﬁeld of investment strategy research. For
instance, journal editors and investors could demand researchers to estimate
that probability when a backtest is submitted to them.
Our approach. First, we introduce a precise characterization of the event
of backtest overﬁtting. The idea is simple and intuitive: For overﬁtting to
occur, the strategy conﬁguration that delivers maximum performance in
sample (IS) must systematically underperform the remaining conﬁgurations
out of sample (OOS). Typically the principal reason for this underperfor-
mance is that the IS “optimal” strategy is so closely tied to the noise con-
tained in the training set that further optimization of the strategy becomes
pointless or even detrimental for the purpose of extracting the signal.
Second, we establish a general framework for assessing the probability
of the event of backtest overﬁtting. We model this phenomenon of backtest
overﬁtting using an abstract probability space in which the sample space
consist of pairs of IS and OOS test results.
Third, we set as null hypothesis that backtest overﬁtting has indeed
taken place, and develop an algorithm that tests for this hypothesis. For
a given strategy, the probability of backtest overﬁtting (PBO) is then eval-
uated as the conditional probability that this strategy underperforms the
median OOS while remaining optimal IS. While the PBO provides a direct
way to quantify the likelihood of backtest overﬁtting, the general framework
also aﬀords us information to look into the overﬁtting issue from diﬀerent
perspectives. For example, besides PBO, this framework can also be used to
assess performance decay, probability of loss, and possible stochastic domi-
nance of a strategy.
It is worth clarifying in what sense do we speak of a probability of back-
5
@@PAGE 6@@
test overﬁtting. Backtest overﬁtting is a deterministic fact (either the model
is overﬁt or it is not), hence it may seem unnatural to associate a probability
to a non-random event. Given some empirical evidence and priors, we can
infer the posterior probability that overﬁtting has taken place. Examples of
this line of reasoning abound in information theory and machine learning
treatises, e.g. [23]. It is in this Bayesian sense that we deﬁne and estimate
PBO.
A generic, model-free, and nonparametric testing algorithm is desirable,
since backtests are applied to trading strategies produced using a great va-
riety of diﬀerent methods and models. For this reason, we present a speciﬁc
implementation, which we call a combinatorially symmetric cross-validation
(CSCV). We show that CSCV produces reasonable estimates of PBO for
several useful examples.
Our CSCV implementation draws from elements in experimental math-
ematics, information theory, Bayesian inference, machine learning and deci-
sion theory to address the very particular problem of assessing the represen-
tativeness of a backtest. This is not an easy problem, as evidenced by the
scarcity of academic papers addressing a dilemma that most investors face.
This gap in the literature is disturbing, given the heavy reliance on backtests
among practitioners. One advantage of our solution is that it only requires
time series of backtested performance. We avoid the credibility issue of pre-
serving a truly out-of-sample test-set by not requiring a ﬁxed “hold-out,”
and swapping all in-sample (IS) and out-of-sample (OOS) datasets. Our
approach is generic in the sense of not requiring knowledge of either the
trading rule or forecasting equation. The output is a bootstrapped distribu-
tion of OOS performance measure. Although in our examples we measure
performance using the Sharpe ratio, our methodology does not rely on this
particular performance statistic, and it can be applied to any alternative
preferred by the reader.
We emphasize that the CSCV implementation is only one illustrative
technique. The general framework is ﬂexible enough to accommodate other
task-speciﬁc methods for estimating the PBO.
Comparisons to other approaches. Perhaps the most common ap-
proach to prevent overﬁtting among practitioners is to require the researcher
to withhold a portion of the available data sample for separate testing and
validation as OOS performance (this is known as the “hold-out” or “test
set” method). If the IS and OOS performance levels are congruent, the in-
vestor might decide to “reject” the hypothesis that the backtest is overﬁt.
6
@@PAGE 7@@
The main advantage of this procedure is its simplicity. This approach is,
however, unsatisfactory for multiple reasons.
First, if the data is publicly available, it is quite likely that the researcher
has used the “hold-out” as part of the IS dataset. Second, even if no “hold-
out” data was used, any seasoned researcher knows well how ﬁnancial vari-
ables performed over the time period covered by the OOS dataset, and that
information may well be used in the strategy design, consciously or not (see
Schorfheide and Wolpin [29]).
Third, hold-out is clearly inadequate for small samples—the IS dataset
will be too short to ﬁt, and the OOS dataset too short to conclude anything
with suﬃcient conﬁdence. Weiss and Kulikowski [34] argue that hold-out
should not be applied to an analysis with less than 1 , 000 observations. For
example, if a strategy trades on a weekly basis, hold-out should not be used
on backtests of less than 20 years. Along the same lines, Van Belle and
Kerr [33] point out the high variance of hold-out estimation errors. If one
is unlucky, the chosen hold-out section may be the one that refutes a valid
strategy or supports an invalid strategy. Diﬀerent hold-outs are thus likely
to lead to diﬀerent conclusions.
Fourth, even if the researcher works with a large sample, the OOS anal-
ysis will need to consume a large proportion of the sample to be conclusive,
which is detrimental to the strategy’s design (see Hawkins [15]). If the OOS
is taken from the end of a time series, we are losing the most recent obser-
vations, which often are the most representative going forward. If the OOS
is taken from the beginning of the time series, the testing has been done on
arguably the least representative portion of the data.
Fifth, as long as the researcher tries more than one strategy conﬁgura-
tion, overﬁtting is always present (see Bailey et al. [1] for a proof). The
hold-out method does not take into account the number of trials attempted
before selecting a particular strategy conﬁguration, and consequently hold-
out cannot correctly assess a backtest’s representativeness.
In short, the hold-out method leaves the investor guessing to what degree
the backtest is overﬁt. The answer to the question “is this backtest overﬁt?”
is not a true-or-false, but a non-null probability that depends on the number
of trials involved (input ignored by hold-out). In this paper we will present
a way to compute this probability.
Another approach popular among practitioners consists in modeling the
underlying ﬁnancial variable by generating pseudorandom scenarios and
measuring the performance of the resulting investment strategy for those
scenarios (see Carr and L´ opez de Prado [6] for a valid application of this
technique). This approach has the advantage of generating a distribution of
7
@@PAGE 8@@
outcomes, rather than relying on a single OOS performance estimate, as the
“hold-out” method does. The disadvantages are that the model that gener-
ates random series of the underlying variable may also be overﬁt, or may not
contain all relevant statistical features, and may need to be customized to
every variable (with large development costs). Some retail trading platforms
oﬀer backtesting procedures based on this approach, such as by pseudoran-
dom generation of tick data by fractal interpolation.
Several procedures have been proposed to determine whether an econo-
metric model is overﬁt. See White [35], Romano et al. [27], Harvey et
al. [13] for a discussion in the context of Econometric models. Essentially
these methods propose a way to adjust the p-values of estimated regression
coeﬃcients to account for the multiplicity of trials. These are valuable ap-
proaches when the trading rule relies on an econometric speciﬁcation. That
is not generally the case, as discussed in Bailey et al. [1]. Investment strate-
gies in general are not amenable to characterization through a system of
algebraic equations. Regression-tree decision making, for example, requires
a hierarchy that only combinatorial frameworks like graph theory can pro-
vide, and which are beyond the geometric arguments used in econometric
models (see Calkin and L´ opez de Prado [4, 5]). On the other hand, the
approach proposed here shares the same philosophy in that both are trying
to assess the probability of overﬁtting.
Structure of the paper. The rest of the study is organized as follows:
Section 2 sets the foundations of our framework: we describe our general
framework for the backtest overﬁtting probability in Subsection 2.1 and
present the CSCV method for estimate this probability in Subsection 2.2.
Section 3 discusses other ways that our general framework can be used to
assess a backtest. Section 4 further discusses some of the features of the
CSCV method, and how it relates to other machine learning methods. Sec-
tion 5 lists some of the limitations of this method. Section 6 discusses a
practical application, and Section 7 summarizes our conclusions. We have
carried out several test cases to illustrate how the PBO compares to diﬀer-
ent scenarios, and to assess the accuracy of our method using two alterna-
tive approaches (Monte Carlo Methods and Extreme Value Theory). The
interested reader can ﬁnd the details of those studies following this link:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2568435
8
@@PAGE 9@@
2 The framework
2.1 Definition of overfitting in the context of strategy
selection
We ﬁrst establish a measure theoretic framework in which the probability
of backtest overﬁtting and other statistics related to the issue of overﬁtting
can be rigorously deﬁned. Consider a probability space ( T,F,Prob ) where
T represents a sample space of pairs of IS and OOS samples. We aim at
estimating the probability of overﬁtting for the following backtest strategy
selection process: select from N strategies labeled as (1, 2,...,N ) the ‘best’
one using backtesting according to a given performance measure, say, the
Sharpe ratio. Fixing a performance measure, we will use random vectors
R = (R1,R 2,...,R N) and R = (R1,R2,..., RN) on (T,F,Prob ) to rep-
resent the IS and OOS performance of the N strategies, respectively. For
a given sample c∈T , that is a concrete pair of IS and OOS samples, we
will use Rc and R
c
to signify the performances of the N strategies on the
IS and OOS pair given by c. For most applications T will be ﬁnite and one
can choose to use the power set T asF. Moreover, often it makes sense in
this case to assume that the Prob is uniform on elements in T . However,
we do not make speciﬁc assumptions at this stage of general discussion so
as to allow ﬂexibility in particular applications.
The key observation here is to compare the ranking of the selected strate-
gies IS and OOS. Therefore we consider the ranking space Ω consists of the
N! permutations of (1, 2,...,N ) indicating the ranking of the N strategies.
Then we use random vectorsr, ¯r to represent the ranking of the components
of R, R, respectively. For example, if N = 3 and the performance measure
is the Sharpe ratio, for a particular sample c∈T , Rc = (0.5, 1.1, 0.7) and
R
c
= (0.6, 0.7, 1.3), then we haverc = (1, 3, 2) and ¯rc = (1, 2, 3). Thus, both
r and ¯r are random vectors mapping (T,F,Prob ) to Ω.
Now, we deﬁne backtest overﬁtting, in the context of investment strategy
selection alluded to above. We will need to use the following subset of Ω:
Ω∗
n ={f∈ Ω|fn =N}.
Deﬁnition 2.1. (Backtest Overﬁtting) We say that the backtest strategy
selection process overﬁts if a strategy with optimal performance IS has an
expected ranking below the median OOS. By the Bayesian formula and using
the notation above that is
N∑
n=1
E[rn|r∈ Ω∗
n]Prob [r∈ Ω∗
n]≤N/2. (2.1)
9
@@PAGE 10@@
Deﬁnition 2.2. (Probability of Backtest Overﬁtting) A strategy with op-
timal performance IS is not necessarily optimal OOS. Moreover, there is a
non-null probability that this strategy with optimal performance IS ranks be-
low the median OOS. This is what we deﬁne as the probability of backtest
overﬁt (PBO). More precisely,
PBO =
N∑
n=1
Prob [rn<N/ 2|r∈ Ω∗
n]Prob [r∈ Ω∗
n]. (2.2)
In other words, we say that a strategy selection process overﬁts if the
expected performance of the strategies selected IS is less than the median
performance rank OOS of all strategies. In that situation, the strategy se-
lection process becomes in fact detrimental. Note that in this context IS
corresponds to the subset of observations used to select the optimal strat-
egy among the N alternatives. With IS we do not mean the period on
which the investment model underlying the strategy was estimated (e.g.,
the period on which crossing moving averages are computed, or a forecast-
ing regression model is estimated). Consequently, in the above deﬁnition
we refer to overﬁtting in relation to the strategy selection process, not a
strategy’s model calibration (e.g., in the context of regressions). That is the
reason we were able to deﬁne overﬁtting without knowledge of the strategy’s
underlying models, i.e., in a model-free and non-parametric manner.
2.2 The CSCV procedure
The framework Subsection 2.1 is ﬂexible in dealing with the probability
of backtest overﬁtting and other statistical characterizations related to the
issue of overﬁtting. However, in order to quantify say the PBO for con-
crete applications we need a method to estimate the probability that was
abstractly deﬁned in the previous section. Estimating the probability in a
particular application relies on schemes for selecting samples of IS and OOS
pairs. This section is devoted to establishing such a procedure, which we
name combinatorially symmetric cross-validation , abbreviated as (CSCV)
for convenience of reference.
Suppose that a researcher is developing an investment strategy. She con-
siders a family of system speciﬁcations and parametric values to be back-
tested, in an attempt to uncover the most proﬁtable incarnation of that
idea. For example, in a trend-following moving average strategy, the re-
searcher might try alternative sample lengths on which the moving averages
are computed, entry thresholds, exit thresholds, stop losses, holding periods,
10
@@PAGE 11@@
sampling frequencies, and so on. As a result, the researcher ends up running
a numberN of alternative model conﬁgurations (or trials), out of which one
is chosen according to some performance evaluation criterion, such as the
Sharpe ratio.
Algorithm 2.3 (CSCV). We proceed as follows.
First, we form a matrix M by collecting the performance series from
theN trials. In particular, each column n = 1,...,N represents a vector of
proﬁts and losses overt = 1,...,T observations associated with a particular
model conﬁguration tried by the researcher. M is therefore a real-valued
matrix of order (T×N). The only conditions we impose are that:
i) M is a true matrix, i.e. with the same number of rows for each column,
where observations are synchronous for every row across the N trials,
and
ii) the performance evaluation metric used to choose the “optimal” strat-
egy can be estimated on subsamples of each column.
For example, if that metric was the Sharpe ratio, we would expect that the
IID Normal distribution assumption could be maintained on various slices
of the reported performance. If diﬀerent model conﬁgurations trade with
diﬀerent frequencies, observations should be aggregated to match a common
index t = 1,...,T .
Second, we partition M across rows, into an even number S of disjoint
submatrices of equal dimensions. Each of these submatrices Ms, with s =
1,...,S , is of order (T/S×N).
Third, we form all combinations CS of Ms, taken in groups of size S/2.
This gives a total number of combinations
( S
S/2
)
=
( S− 1
S/2− 1
) S
S/2 =... =
S/2−1∏
i=0
S−i
S/2−i (2.3)
For instance, ifS = 16, we will form 12, 780 combinations. Each combination
c∈CS is composed of S/2 submatrices Ms.
Fourth, for each combination c∈CS, we:
a) Form the training set J, by joining the S/2 submatrices Ms that con-
stitute c in their original order. J is a matrix of order ( T/S )(S/2)×
N) =T/2×N.
11
@@PAGE 12@@
b) Form the testing set J, as the complement of J inM. In other words,
J is the T/2×N matrix formed by all rows of M that are not part of
J also in their original order. (The order in forming J andJ does not
matter for some performance measures such as the Sharpe ratio but
does matter for others e.g. return maximum drawdown ratio).
c) Form a vector Rc of performance statistics of order N, where the nth
componentRc
n of Rc reports the performance associated with the nth
column ofJ (the testing set). As before rank of the components of Rc
is denoted by rc the IS ranking of the N strategies.
d) Repeat c) with J replaced by J (the test set) to derive R
c
and ¯rc the
OOS performance statistics and rank of the N strategies, respectively.
e) Determine the element n∗ such that rc
n∗∈ Ω∗
n∗. In other words, n∗ is
the best performing strategy IS.
f) Deﬁne the relative rank of ¯rc
n∗ by ¯ωc := ¯rc
n∗/(N + 1)∈ (0, 1). This is
the relative rank of the OOS performance associated with the strategy
chosen IS. If the strategy optimization procedure is not overﬁtting, we
should observe that ¯rc
n∗ systematically outperforms OOS, just as rc
n∗
outperformed IS.
g) We deﬁne the logit λc = ln ¯ωc
(1−¯ωc). High logit values imply a consis-
tency between IS and OOS performances, which indicates a low level
of backtest overﬁtting.
Fifth, we compute the distribution of ranks OOS by collecting all the
λc, for c∈CS. Deﬁne the relative frequency at which λ occurred across all
CS by
f(λ) =
∑
c∈CS
χ{λ}(λc)
#(CS) , (2.4)
where χ is the characterization function and #(CS) signiﬁes the number of
elements in CS. Then
∫∞
−∞f(λ)dλ = 1. This concludes the procedure.
Figure 1 schematically represents how the combinations in CS are used
to produce training and testing sets, where S = 4. It shows the six combi-
nations of four subsamples A, B, C, D, grouped in two subsets of size two.
The ﬁrst subset is the training set (or in-sample). This is used to deter-
mine the optimal model conﬁguration. The second subset is the testing set
(or out-of-sample), on which the in-sample optimal model conﬁguration is
12
@@PAGE 13@@
Figure 1: Generating the CS symmetric combination.
tested. Running the N model conﬁgurations over each of these combinations
allows us to derive a relative ranking, expressed as a logit. The outcome is
a distribution of logits, one per combination. Note that each training sub-
set combination is re-used as a testing subset and vice-versa (as is possible
because we split the data in two equal parts).
3 Overfit statistics
The framework introduced in Section 2 allows us to characterize the relia-
bility of a strategy’s backtest in terms of four complementary analysis:
1. Probability of Backtest Overﬁtting (PBO): The probability that the
model conﬁguration selected as optimal IS will underperform the me-
dian of the N model conﬁgurations OOS.
2. Performance degradation: This determines to what extent greater per-
formance IS leads to lower performance OOS, an occurrence associated
with the memory eﬀects discussed in Bailey et al. [1].
3. Probability of loss: The probability that the model selected as optimal
IS will deliver a loss OOS.
4. Stochastic dominance : This analysis determines whether the proce-
dure used to select a strategy IS is preferable to randomly choosing
one model conﬁguration among the N alternatives.
3.1 Probability of backtest overfitting (PBO)
The PBO deﬁned in Section 2.1 may now be estimated using the CSCV
method with φ =
∫ 0
−∞f(λ)dλ. This represents the rate at which optimal IS
strategies underperform the median of the OOS trials. The analogue of ¯r in
13
@@PAGE 14@@
medical research is the placebo given to a portion of patients in the test set.
If the backtest is truly helpful, the optimal strategy selected IS should out-
perform most of theN trials OOS. That is the case whenλc> 0. For φ≈ 0,
a low proportion of the optimal IS strategy outperformed the median of
trials in most of the testing sets indicating no signiﬁcant overﬁtting. On the
ﬂip side, φ≈ 1 indicates high likelihood of overﬁtting. We consider at least
three uses for PBO: i) In general the value of φ provides us a quantitative
sense about the likelihood of overﬁtting. In accordance with standard ap-
plications of the Neyman-Pearson framework, a customary approach would
be to reject models for which PBO is estimated to be greater than 0 .05. ii)
PBO could be used as a prior probability in Bayesian applications, where
for instance the goal may be to derive the posterior probability of a model’s
forecast. iii) We could compute the PBO on a large number of investment
strategies, and use those PBO estimates to compute a weighted portfolio,
where the weights are given by (1−PBO ), 1/PBO or some other scheme.
3.2 Performance degradation and probability of loss
Section 2.2 introduced the procedure to compute, among other results, the
pair (Rn∗,Rn∗) for each combination c∈CS. Note that while we know that
Rn∗ is the maximum among the components of R, Rn∗ is not necessarily
the maximum among the components of R. Because we are trying every
combination of Ms taken in groups of size S/2, there is no reason to expect
the distribution of R to dominate over R. The implication is that, generally,
Rn∗ < max{R}≈ max{R} =Rn∗. For a regression Rn∗
c
=α +βRc
n∗ +εc,
the β will be negative in most practical cases, due to compensation eﬀects
described in Bailey et al. [1]. An intuitive explanation for this negative
slope is that overﬁt backtests minimize future performance: The model is
so ﬁt to past noise, that it is often rendered unﬁt for future signal. And
the more overﬁt a backtest is, the more memory is accumulated against its
future performance.
It is interesting to plot the pairs ( Rn∗,Rn∗) to visualize how strong is
such performance degradation, andto obtain a more realistic range of at-
tainable performance OOS (see Figure 8). A particularly useful statistic is
the proportion of combinations with negative performance, Prob [Rn∗
c
< 0].
Note that, even if φ ≈ 0, Prob [Rn∗
c
< 0] could be high, in which case
the strategy’s performance OOS is probably poor for reasons other than
overﬁtting.
Figure 2 provides a graphical representation of i) Out-Of-Sample Perfor-
mance Degradation, ii) Out-Of-Sample Probability of Loss, and iii) Proba-
14
@@PAGE 15@@
Figures
Figure 2: Performance degradation and distribution of logits. Note that
even if φ≈ 0, Prob [Rn∗
c
< 0] could be high, in which case the strategy’s
performance OOS is poor for reasons other than overﬁtting.
15
@@PAGE 16@@
bility of Overﬁtting (PBO).
The upper plot of Figure 2 shows that pairs of (SR IS, SR OOS) for the
optimal model conﬁgurations selected for each subset c∈CS, which corre-
sponds to the performance degradation associated with the backtest of an
investment strategy. We can once again appreciate the negative relationship
between greater SR IS and SR OOS, indicating that at some point seeking
the optimal performance becomes detrimental. Whereas 100% of the SR IS
are positive, about 78% of the SR OOS are negative. Also, Sharpe ratios
IS range between 1 and 3, indicating that backtests with high Sharpe ratios
tell us nothing regarding the representativeness of that result.
We cannot hope escaping the risk of overﬁtting by exceeding some SR
IS threshold. On the contrary, it appears that the higher the SR IS, the
lower the SR OOS. In this example we are evaluating performance using
the Sharpe ratio, however, we again stress that our procedure is generic
and can be applied to any performance evaluation metric R (Sortino ratio,
Jensen’s Alpha, Probabilistic Sharpe Ratio, etc.). The method also allows
us to compute the proportion of combinations with negative performance,
Prob [Rn∗
c
< 0], which corresponds to analysis ii).
The lower plot of Figure 2 shows the distribution of logits for the same
strategy, with a PBO of 74%. It displays the distribution of logits, which
allows us to compute the probability of backtest overﬁtting (PBO). This
represents the rate at which optimal IS strategies underperform the median
of the OOS trials.
Figure 3 plots the performance degradation and distribution of logits
of a real investment strategy. Unlike in the previous example, the OOS
probability of loss is very small (about 3%), and the proportion of selected
(IS) model conﬁgurations that performed OOS below the median of overall
model conﬁgurations was only 4%.
The upper plot of Figure 3 plots the performance degradation associated
with the backtest of a real investment strategy. The regression line that goes
through the pairs of (SR IS, SR OOS) is much less steep, and only 3% of the
SR OOS are negative. The lower plot of Figure 3 shows the distribution of
logits, with a PBO of 0 .04%. According to this analysis, it is unlikely that
this backtest is signiﬁcantly overﬁt. The chances that this strategy performs
well OOS are much greater than in the previous example.
3.3 Stochastic dominance
A further application of the results derived in Section 2.2 is to determine
whether the distribution of Rn∗ across all c∈ CS stochastically dominates
16
@@PAGE 17@@
Figure 3: Performance degradation and distribution of logits for a real in-
vestment strategy.
17
@@PAGE 18@@
over the distribution of all R. Should that not be the case, it would present
strong evidence that strategy selection optimization does not provide con-
sistently better OOS results than a random strategy selection. One reason
that the concept of stochastic dominance is useful is that it allows us to
rank gambles or lotteries without having to make strong assumptions re-
garding an individual’s utility function. See Hadar and Russell [11] for an
introduction to these matters.
In the context of our framework, ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance oc-
curs if Prob [Rn∗ ≥ x] ≥ Prob [Mean(R) ≥ x] for all x, and for some
x, Prob [Rn∗ ≥ x] > Prob[Mean(R)≥ x]. It can be veriﬁed visually by
checking that the cumulative distribution function of Rn∗ is not above the
cumulative distribution function of R for all possible outcomes, and at least
for one outcome the former is strictly below the latter. Under such circum-
stances, the decision maker would prefer the criterion used to produce Rn∗
over a random sampling of R, assuming only that her utility function is
weakly increasing.
A less demanding criterion is second-order stochastic dominance. This
requires that SD2[x] =
∫x
−∞(Prob [Mean(R)≤x]−Prob [Rn∗≤x])dx≥ 0
for all x, and that SD2[x] > 0 at some x. When that is the case, the
decision maker would prefer the criterion used to produceRn∗ over a random
sampling of R, as long as she is risk averse and her utility function is weakly
increasing.
Figure 4 complements the analysis presented in Figure 2, with analysis
of stochastic dominance. Stochastic dominance allows us to rank gambles
or lotteries without having to make strong assumptions regarding an indi-
vidual’s utility function.
Figure 4 also provides an example of the cumulative distribution function
of Rn∗ across all c∈CS (red line) and R (blue line), as well as the second
order stochastic dominance (SD2[x], green line) for every OOS SR. In this
example, the distribution of OOS SR of optimized (IS) model conﬁgurations
does not dominate (to ﬁrst order) the distribution of OOS SR of overall
model conﬁgurations.
This can be seen in the fact that for every level of OOS SR, the proportion
of optimized model conﬁgurations is greater than the proportion of non-
optimized, thus the probabilistic mass of the former is shifted to the left of
the non-optimized. SD2 plots the second order stochastic dominance, which
indicates that the distribution of optimized model conﬁgurations does not
dominate the non-optimized even according to this less demanding criterion.
It has been computed on the same backtest used for Figure 2. Consistent
with that result, the overall distribution of OOS performance dominates the
18
@@PAGE 19@@
Figure 4: Stochastic dominance (example 1).
OOS performance of the optimal strategy selection procedure, a clear sign
of overﬁtting.
Figure 5 provides a counter-example, based on the same real investment
strategy used in Figure 3. It indicates that the strategy selection proce-
dure used in this backtest actually added value, since the distribution of
OOS performance for the selected strategies clearly dominates the overall
distribution of OOS performance. (First-order stochastic dominance is a
suﬃcient condition for second-order stochastic dominance, and the plot of
SD2[x] is consistent with that fact.)
4 Features of the CSCV sampling method
Our testing method utilises multiple developments in the ﬁelds of machine
learning (combinatorial optimization, jackknife, cross-validation) and de-
cision theory (logistic function, stochastic dominance). Standard cross-
validation methods include k-fold cross-validation (K-FCV) and leave-one-
out cross-validation (LOOCV).
Now, K-FCV randomly divides the sample of size T into k subsamples
19
@@PAGE 20@@
Figure 5: Stochastic dominance (example 2).
of size T/k . Then it sequentially tests on each of the k samples the model
trained on the T−T/k sample. Although a very valid approach in many
situations, we believe that our procedure is more satisfactory than K-FCV
in the context of strategy selection. In particular, we would like to compute
the Sharpe ratio (or any other performance measure) on each of thek testing
sets of size T/k . This means that k must be suﬃciently small, so that the
Sharpe ratio estimate is reliable (see Bailey and L´ opez de Prado [2] for a
discussion of Sharpe ratio conﬁdence bands). But if k is small, K-FCV
will essentially reduce to a “hold-out” method, which we have argued is
unreliable. Also, LOOCV is a K-FCV where k = T . We are not aware of
any reliable performance metric computed on a single OOS observation.
The combinatorially symmetric cross-validation (CSCV) method we have
proposed in Section 2.2 diﬀers from both K-FCV and LOOCV. The key idea
is to generate
( S
S/2
)
testing sets of size T/2 by recombining the S slices of
the overall sample of size T . This procedure presents a number of advan-
tages. First, CSCV ensures that the training and testing sets are of equal
size, thus providing comparable accuracy to the IS and OOS Sharpe ratios
(or any other performance metric that is susceptible to sample size).
20
@@PAGE 21@@
This is important, because making the testing set smaller than the train-
ing set (as hold-out does) would mean that we are evaluating with less accu-
racy OOS than the was used to choose the optimal strategy. Second, CSCV
is symmetric, in the sense that all training sets are re-used as testing sets
and vice versa. In this way, the decline in performance can only result from
overﬁtting, not arbitrary discrepancies between the training and testing sets.
Third, CSCV respects the time-dependence and other season-dependent
features present in the data, because it does not require a random allocation
of the observations to the S subsamples. We avoid that requirement by
recombining the S subsamples into the
( S
S/2
)
testing sets. Fourth, CSCV
derives a non-random distribution of logits, in the sense that each logit is
deterministically derived from one item in the set of combinations CS. As
with jackknife resampling, running CSCV twice on the same inputs generates
identical results. Therefore, for each analysis, CSCV will provide a single
result, φ, which can be independently replicated and veriﬁed by another
user. Fifth, the dispersion of the distribution of logits conveys relevant
information regarding the robustness of the strategy selection procedure. A
robust strategy selection leads to a consistent OOS performance rankings,
which translate into similar logits.
Sixth, our procedure to estimate PBO is model-free, in the sense that it
does not require the researcher to specify a forecasting model or the deﬁni-
tions of forecasting errors. It is also non-parametric, as we are not making
distributional assumptions on PBO. This is accomplished by using the con-
cept of logit, λc. A logit is the logarithm of odds. In our problem, the odds
are represented by relative ranks (i.e., the odds that the optimal strategy
chosen IS happens to underperform OOS). The logit function presents the
advantage of being the inverse of the sigmoidal logistic distribution, which
resembles the cumulative Normal distribution.
As a consequence, ifωc are distributed close to uniformly (the case when
the backtest appears to be informationless), the distribution of the logits
will approximate the standard Normal. This is important, because it gives
us a baseline of what to expect in the threshold case where the backtest
does not seem to provide any insight into the OOS performance. If good
backtesting results are conducive to good OOS performance, the distribution
of logits will be centered in a signiﬁcantly positive value, and its left tail will
marginally cover the region of negative logit values, making φ≈ 0.
A key parameter of our procedure is the value of S. This regulates the
number of submatrices Ms that will be generated, each of order (T/S×N),
and also the number of logit values that will be computed,
( S
S/2
)
. Indeed, S
must be large enough so that the number of combinations suﬃces to draw
21
@@PAGE 22@@
inference. If S is too small, the left tail of the distribution of logits will be
underrepresented. On the other hand, if we believe that the performance
series is time-dependent and incorporates seasonal eﬀects, S cannot be too
large, or the relevant time structure may be shuttered across the partitions.
For example, if the backtest includes more than six years of data, S =
24 generates partitions spanning over a quarter each, which would pre-
serve daily, weekly and monthly eﬀects, while producing a distribution of
2, 704, 156 logits. By contrast, if we are interested in quarterly eﬀects, we
have two choices: i) Work with S = 12 partitions, which will give us 924
logits, and/or ii) double T , so that S does not need to be reduced. The ac-
curacy of the procedure relies on computing a large number of logits, where
that number is derived in Equation (2.3). Because f(λ) is estimated as a
proportion of the number of logits, S needs to be large enough to generate
suﬃcient logits. For a proportion ˆ p estimated on a sample of size N, the
standard deviation of its expected value can be computed asσ[ˆp] =
√
p(1−p)
N
(see Gelman and Hill [10]). In other words, the standard deviation is highest
for p = 1
2, with σ[ˆp] =
√
1
4N . Fortunately, even a small number S gener-
ates a large number of logits. For example, S = 16 we will obtain 12 , 780
logits (see Equation (2.3)), and σ[f(λ)] < 0.0045, with less than a 0 .01 es-
timation error at 95% conﬁdence level. Also, if M contains 4 years of daily
data,S = 16 would equate to quarterly partitions, and the serial correlation
structure would be preserved. For these two reasons, we believe thatS = 16
is a reasonable value to use in most cases.
Another key parameter is the number of trials (i.e., the number of
columns in Ms). Hold-out’s disregard for the number of trials attempted
was the reason we concluded it was an inappropriate method to assess a
backtest’s representativeness (see Bailey et al. [1] for a proof). N must be
large enough to provide suﬃcient granularity to the values of the relative
rank, ωc. If N is too small, ωc will take only a very few values, which will
translate into a very discrete number of logits, making f(λ) too discontinu-
ous, and adding estimation error to the evaluation of φ. For example, if the
investor is sensitive to values ofφ< 1/10, it is clear that the range of values
that the logits can adopt must be greater than 10, and so N >> 10 is re-
quired. Other considerations regarding N will be discussed in the following
Section.
Finally, PBO is evaluated by comparing combinations of T/2 observa-
tions with their complements. But the backtest works with T observations,
rather than only T/2. Therefore, T should be chosen to be double of the
number of observations used by the investor to choose a model conﬁguration
22
@@PAGE 23@@
or to determine a forecasting speciﬁcation.
5 Limitations and misuse
The general framework in Subsection 2.1 can be ﬂexibly used to assess back-
test overﬁtting probability. Quantitative assessment, however, also relies on
methods for estimating the probability measure. In this paper, we focus
on one of such implementations: the CSCV method. This procedure was
designed to evaluate PBO under minimal assumptions and input require-
ments. In doing so, we have attempted to provide a very general (in fact,
model-free and non-parametric) procedure against which IS backtests can be
benchmarked. However, any particular implementation has its limitations
and the CSCV method is no exception. Below is a discussion of some of the
limitations of this method from the perspective of design and application.
5.1 Limitation in design
First, a key feature of the CSCV implementation is symmetry. In dividing
the total sample of the testing results into IS and OOS both the size and
method of division in CSCV are symmetric. The advantage of such an
symmetric division has been elaborated above. However, the complexity of
investment strategies and performance measures makes it unlikely that any
particular method will be a one size ﬁts all solution. For some backtests
other methods, for example K-FCV, may well be better suited.
Moreover, symmetrically dividing the sample performance in to S sym-
metrically layered sub-samples also may not suitable for certain strategies.
For example, if the performance measure as a time series has a strong auto-
correlation, then such a division may obscure the characterization especially
when S is large.
Finally, the CSCV estimate of the probability measure assumes all the
sample statistics carries the same weight. Without knowing any prior infor-
mation on the distribution of the backtest performance measure this is, of
course, a natural and reasonable choice. If, however, one does have knowl-
edge regarding the distribution of the backtest performance measure, then
model-speciﬁc methods of dividing the sample performance measure and as-
signing diﬀerent weights to diﬀerent strips of the subdivision are likely to be
more accurate. For instance, if a forecasting equation was used to generate
the trials, it would be possible to develop a framework that evaluates PBO
particular to that forecasting equation.
23
@@PAGE 24@@
5.2 Limitation in application
First, the researcher must provide full information regarding the actual trials
conducted, to avoid the ﬁle drawer problem (the test is only as good as
the completeness of the underlying information), and should test as many
strategy conﬁgurations as is reasonable and feasible. Hiding trials will lead to
an underestimation of the overﬁt, because each logit will be evaluated under
a biased relative rank ωc. This would be equivalent to removing subjects
from the trials of a new drug, once we have veriﬁed that the drug was not
eﬀective on them. Likewise, adding trials that are doomed to fail in order to
make one particular model conﬁguration succeed biases the result. If a model
conﬁguration is obviously ﬂawed, it should have never been tried in the ﬁrst
place. A case in point is guided searches, where an optimization algorithm
uses information from prior iterations to decide what direction should be
followed next. In this case, the columns of matrix M should be the ﬁnal
outcome of each guided search (i.e., after it has converged to a solution),
and not the intermediate steps. 2 This procedure aims at evaluating how
reliable a backtest selection process is when choosing among feasible strategy
conﬁgurations. As a rule of thumb, the researcher should backtest as many
theoretically reasonable strategy conﬁgurations as possible.
Second, this procedure does nothing to evaluate the correctness of a
backtest. If the backtest is ﬂawed due to bad assumptions, such as incorrect
transaction costs or using data not available at the moment of making a
decision, our approach will be making an assessment based on ﬂawed infor-
mation.
Third, this procedure only takes into account structural breaks as long
as they are present in the dataset of length T . If a structural break occurs
outside the boundaries of the available dataset, the strategy may be over-
ﬁt to a particular data regime, which our PBO has failed to account for
because the entire set belongs to the same regime. This invites the more
general warning that the dataset used for any backtest is expected to be
representative of future states of the modeled ﬁnancial variable.
Fourth, although a high PBO indicates overﬁtting in the group of N
tested strategies, skillful strategies can still exists in these N strategies. For
example, it is entirely possible that all theN strategies have high but similar
Sharpe ratios. Since none of the strategies is clearly better than the rest,
PBO will be high. Here overﬁtting is among many ‘skillful’ strategies.
Fifth, we must warn the reader against applying CSCV to guide the
2We thank David Aronson and Timothy Masters (Baruch College) for asking for this
clariﬁcation.
24
@@PAGE 25@@
search for an optimal strategy. That would constitute a gross misuse of our
method. As Strathern [31] eloquently put it, “when a measure becomes a
target, it ceases to be a good measure.” Any counter-overﬁtting technique
used to select an optimal strategy will result in overﬁtting. For example,
CSCV can be employed to evaluate the quality of a strategy selection pro-
cess, but PBO should not be the objective function on which such selection
relies.
6 A practical application
Bailey et al. [1] present an example of an investment strategy that attempts
to proﬁt from a seasonal eﬀect. For the reader’s convenience, we reiterate
here how the strategy works. Suppose that we would like to identify the
optimal monthly trading rule, given four customary parameters: Entry day,
Holding period, Stop loss and Side.
Side deﬁnes whether we will hold long or short positions on a monthly
basis. Entry day determines the business day of the month when we enter
a position. Holding period gives the number of days that the position is
held. Stop loss determines the size of the loss as a multiple of the series’
volatility that triggers an exit for that month’s position. For example, we
could explore all nodes that span the interval [1 ,..., 22] for Entry day, the
interval [1,..., 20] for Holding period, the interval [0,..., 10] for Stop loss,
and{−1, 1} for Sign. The parameters combinations involved form a four-
dimensional mesh of 8,800 elements. The optimal parameter combination
can be discovered by computing the performance derived by each node.
First, as discussed in the above cited paper, a time series of 1 , 000 daily
prices (about 4 years) was generated by drawing from a random walk. Pa-
rameters were optimized (Entry day = 11, Holding period = 4, Stop loss =
-1 and Side = 1), resulting in an annualized Sharpe ratio of 1 .27. Given the
elevated Sharpe ratio, we may conclude that this strategy’s performance is
signiﬁcantly greater than zero for any conﬁdence level. Indeed, the PSR-
Stat is 2.83, which implies a less than 1% probability that the true Sharpe
ratio is below 0 (see Bailey and L´ opez de Prado [2] for details). Figure 6
gives a graphical illustration of this example.
We have estimated the PBO using our CSCV procedure, and obtained
the results illustrated below. Figure 7 shows that approx. 53% of the SR
OOS are negative, despite all SR IS being positive and ranging between
1 and 2.2. Figure 8 plots the distribution of logits, which implies that,
despite the elevated SR IS, the PBO is as high as 55%. Consequently,
25
@@PAGE 26@@
Figure 6: Backtested performance of a seasonal strategy (example 1).
Figure 9 shows that the distribution of optimized OOS SR does not dominate
the overall distribution of OOS SR. This is consistent with the fact that
the underlying series follows a random walk, thus the serial independence
among observations makes any seasonal patterns coincidental. The CSCV
framework has succeeded in diagnosing that the backtest was overﬁt.
Second, we generated a time series of 1, 000 daily prices (about 4 years),
following a random walk. But unlike the ﬁrst case, we have shifted the
returns of the ﬁrst 5 random observations of each month to be centered at
a quarter of a standard deviation. This simulates a monthly seasonal eﬀect,
which the strategy selection procedure should discover. Figure 10 plots
the random series, as well as the performance associated with the optimal
parameter combination: Entry day = 1, Holding period = 4, Stop loss =
-10 and Side = 1. The annualized Sharpe ratio at 1 .54 is similar to the
previous (overﬁt) case (1.54 vs. 1.3).
The next three graphs report the results of the CSCV analysis, which
conﬁrm the validity of this backtest in the sense that performance inﬂation
from overﬁtting is minimal. Figure 11 shows only 13% of the OOS SR to
be negative. Because there is a real monthly eﬀect in the data, the PBO for
26
@@PAGE 27@@
Figure 7: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example 1):
Performance degradation.
this second case should be substantially lower than the PBO of the ﬁrst case.
Figure 12 shows a distribution of logits with a PBO of only 13%. Figure
13 evidences that the distribution of OOS SR from IS optimal combinations
clearly dominates the overall distribution of OOS SR. The CSCV analysis
has this time correctly recognized the validity of this backtest, in the sense
that performance inﬂation from overﬁtting is small.
In this practical application we have illustrated how simple is to produce
overﬁt backtests when answering common investment questions, such as the
presence of seasonal eﬀects. We refer the reader to [1, Appendix 4] for the
implementation of this experiment in Python language. Similar experiments
can be designed to demonstrate overﬁtting in the context of other eﬀects,
such as trend-following, momentum, mean-reversion, event-driven eﬀects,
and the like. Given the facility with which elevated Sharpe ratios can be
manufactured IS, the reader would be well advised to remain critical of
backtests and researchers that fail to report the PBO results.
27
@@PAGE 28@@
Figure 8: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example 1):
logit distrubution.
7 Conclusions
In [2] Bailey and L´ opez de Prado developed methodologies to evaluate the
probability that a Sharpe ratio is inﬂated (PSR), and to determine the
minimum track record length (MinTRL) required for a Sharpe ratio to be
statistically signiﬁcant. These statistics were developed to assess Sharpe
ratios based on live investment performance and backtest track records. This
paper has extended this approach to present formulas and approximation
techniques for ﬁnding the probability of backtest overﬁtting.
To that end, we have proposed a general framework for modeling the
IS and OOS performance using probability. We deﬁne the probability of
backtested overﬁtting (PBO) as the probability that an optimal strategy IS
underperforms the mean OOS. To facilitate the evaluation of PBO for par-
ticular applications, we have proposed a combinatorially symmetric cross-
validation (CSCV) implementation framework for estimating this probabil-
ity. This estimate is generic, symmetric, model-free and non-parametric.
We have assessed the accuracy of CSCV as an approximation of PBO in
28
@@PAGE 29@@
Figure 9: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example 1):
Absent of dominance.
two diﬀerent ways, on a wide variety of test cases. Monte Carlo simula-
tions show that CSCV applied on a single dataset provides similar results to
computing PBO on a large number of independent samples. We have also
directly computed PBO by deriving the Extreme Value distributions that
model the performance of IS optimal strategies. These results indicate that
CSCV provides reasonable estimates of PBO, with relatively small errors.
Besides estimating PBO, our general framework and its CSCV imple-
mentation scheme can also be used to deal with other issues related to
overﬁtting, such as performance degeneration, probability of loss and pos-
sible stochastic dominance of a strategy. On the other hand, the CSCV
implementation also has some limitations. This suggests that other imple-
mentation frameworks may well be more suitable, particularly for problems
with structure information.
Nevertheless, we believe that CSCV provides both a new and powerful
tool in the arsenal of an investment and ﬁnancial researcher, and that it also
29
@@PAGE 30@@
Figure 10: Backtested performance of a seasonal strategy (example 2).
constitutes a nice illustration of our general framework for quantitatively
studying issues related to backtest overﬁtting. We certainly hope that this
study will raise greater awareness concerning the futility of computing and
reporting backtest results, without ﬁrst controlling for PBO and MinBTL.
References
[1] Bailey, D., J. Borwein, M. L´ opez de Prado and J. Zhu, “Pseudo-mathematics
and ﬁnancial charlatanism: The eﬀects of backtest over ﬁtting on out-of-sample
performance,” Notices of the AMS , 61 May (2014), 458–471. Online at http:
//www.ams.org/notices/201405/rnoti-p458.pdf.
[2] Bailey, D. and M. L´ opez de Prado, “The Sharpe Ratio Eﬃcient Frontier,” Journal
of Risk, 15(2012), 3–44. Available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1821643.
[3] Bailey, D. and M. L´ opez de Prado, “The Deﬂated Sharpe Ratio: Correcting for
Selection Bias, Backtest Overﬁtting and Non-Normality”, Journal of Portfolio Man-
agement, 40 (5) (2014), 94-107.
[4] Calkin, N. and M. L´ opez de Prado, “Stochastic Flow Diagrams”, Algorithmic Fi-
nance, 3(1-2) (2014) Available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2379314.
30
@@PAGE 31@@
Figure 11: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example
2): monthly eﬀect.
[5] Calkin, N. and M. L´ opez de Prado, “The Topology of Macro Financial Flows: An Ap-
plication of Stochastic Flow Diagrams”, Algorithmic Finance, 3(1-2) (2014). Avail-
able at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2379319.
[6] Carr, P. and M. L´ opez de Prado, “Determining Optimal Trading Rules without
Backtesting”, (2014) Available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1408.1159.
[7] Doyle, J. and C. Chen, “The wandering weekday eﬀect in major stock markets,”
Journal of Banking and Finance , 33 (2009), 1388–1399.
[8] Embrechts, P., C. Klueppelberg and T. Mikosch, Modelling Extremal Events ,
Springer Verlag, New York, 2003.
[9] Feynman, R., The Character of Physical Law , 1964, The MIT Press.
[10] Gelman, A. and J. Hill, Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical
Models, 2006, Cambridge University Press, First Edition.
[11] Hadar, J. and W. Russell, “Rules for Ordering Uncertain Prospects,” American
Economic Review, 59 (1969), 25–34.
[12] Harris, L., Trading snf Exchanges: Market Microstructure for Practitioners , Oxford
University Press, 2003.
31
@@PAGE 32@@
Figure 12: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example
2): logit distribution.
[13] Harvey, C. and Y. Liu, “Backtesting”, SSRN, working paper, 2013. Available at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2345489.
[14] Harvey, C., Y. Liu and H. Zhu, “...and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns,”
SSRN, 2013. Available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=2249314.
[15] Hawkins, D., “The problem of overﬁtting,” Journal of Chemical Information and
Computer Science, 44 (2004), 10–12.
[16] Hirsch, Y., Don’t Sell Stocks on Monday , Penguin Books, 1st Edition, 1987.
[17] Ioannidis, J.P.A., “Why most published research ﬁndings are false.” PloS Medicine,
Vol. 2, No. 8,(2005) 696-701.
[18] Leinweber, D. and K. Sisk,“Event Driven Trading and the ‘New News’,” Journal of
Portfolio Management, 38(2011), 110–124.
[19] Leontief, W., “Academic Economics”, Science, 9 Jul 1982, 104–107.
[20] Lo, A., “The Statistics of Sharpe Ratios,” Financial Analysts Journal , 58 (2002),
July/August.
32
@@PAGE 33@@
Figure 13: CSCV analysis of the backtest of a seasonal strategy (example
2): dominance.
[21] L´ opez de Prado, M. and A. Peijan, “Measuring the Loss Potential of Hedge Fund
Strategies,” Journal of Alternative Investments , 7 (2004), 7–31. Available at http:
//ssrn.com/abstract=641702.
[22] L´ opez de Prado, M. and M. Foreman, ”A Mixture of Gaussians Approach to Math-
ematical Portfolio Oversight: The EF3M Algorithm”, Quantitative Finance, forth-
coming, 2014. Available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1931734.
[23] MacKay, D.J.C. “Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms”, Cam-
bridge University Press, First Edition, 2003.
[24] Mayer, J., K. Khairy and J. Howard, “Drawing an Elephant with Four Complex
Parameters,” American Journal of Physics , 78 (2010), 648–649.
[25] Miller, R.G., Simultaneous Statistical Inference, 2nd Ed. Springer Verlag, New York,
1981. ISBN 0-387-90548-0.
[26] Resnick, S., Extreme Values, Regular Variation and Point Processes, Springer, 1987.
[27] Romano, J. and M. Wolf, “Stepwise multiple testing as formalized data snooping”,
Econometrica, 73 (2005), 1273–1282.
33
@@PAGE 34@@
[28] Sala-i-Martin, X., “I just ran two million regressions.” American Economic Review.
87(2), May (1997).
[29] Schorfheide, F. and K. Wolpin, “On the Use of Holdout Samples for Model Selec-
tion,” American Economic Review, 102 (2012), 477–481.
[30] Stodden, V., Bailey, D., Borwein, J., LeVeque, R, Rider, W. and Stein, W., “Set-
ting the default to reproducible: Reproduciblity in computational and experimen-
tal mathematics,” February, 2013. Available at http://www.davidhbailey.com/
dhbpapers/icerm-report.pdf.
[31] Strathern, M., “Improving Ratings: Audit in the British University System,” Euro-
pean Review, 5, (1997) pp. 305-308.
[32] The Economist, “Trouble at the lab”, Oct. 2013 Available at
http://www.economist.com/news/brieﬁng/21588057 -scientists -think-science-
self -correcting-alarming-degree-it-not-trouble.
[33] Van Belle, G. and K. Kerr, Design and Analysis of Experiments in the Health Sci-
ences, John Wiley and Sons, 2012.
[34] Weiss, S. and C. Kulikowski, Computer Systems That Learn: Classiﬁcation and Pre-
diction Methods from Statistics, Neural Nets, Machine Learning and Expert Systems,
Morgan Kaufman, 1st Edition, 1990.
[35] White, H., “A Reality Check for Data Snooping,” Econometrica, 68 (2000), 1097–
1126.
[36] Wittgenstein, L.: Philosophical Investigations, 1953. Blackwell Publishing. Section
201.
34