
===== PAGE 1 =====
Fundamentals of Perpetual Futures∗
Songrun He Asaf Manela Omri Ross Victor von Wachter
First draft December 2022. This draft July 2024.
Abstract
Perpetual futures are the most popular cryptocurrency derivatives. Perpetuals
offer leveraged exposure to their underlying without rollover or direct ownership.
Unlike fixed-maturity futures, perpetuals are not guaranteed to converge to the
spot price. To minimize the gap between perpetual and spot prices, long investors
periodically pay shorts a funding rate proportional to this difference. We derive no-
arbitrage prices for perpetual futures in frictionless markets and bounds in markets
with trading costs. Empirically, deviations from these prices in crypto are larger than
in traditional currency markets, comove across currencies, and diminish over time. An
implied arbitrage strategy yields high Sharpe ratios.
JEL Classification: G11, G12, G13
Keywords: Perpetual futures, crypto, random-maturity arbitrage, funding rate
∗We are grateful to Lin William Cong, Urban Jermann, Shimon Kogan, Stefan Nagel, Tim Roughgarden,
Adrien Verdelhan, as well as conference participants at the 2024 Utah Winter Finance Conference and
seminar participants at a16z Crypto, Bank of Israel, Hebrew University, Reichman University, the University
of Chicago, and the Virtual Derivatives Workshop for their insightful feedback and helpful comments.
Songrun He is at Washington University in St. Louis ( h.songrun@wustl.edu). Asaf Manela is at
Washington University in St. Louis and Reichman University ( amanela@wustl.edu). Omri Ross is at
University of Copenhagen ( omri@di.ku.dk), and Chief Blockchain Scientist at the eToro Group. Victor
von Wachter is at University of Copenhagen (victor.vonwachter@di.ku.dk).
arXiv:2212.06888v6  [q-fin.PR]  21 Aug 2024
===== PAGE 2 =====
1 Introduction
Perpetual futures are, by far, the most popular derivative traded in cryptocurrency
markets, generating a daily volume of more than$100 billion. Prior to the recent collapse
of FTX, perpetual futures were among the most actively traded products on the exchange,
with the now-bankrupt hedge fund Alameda Research taking the other side of many such
leveraged trades. Despite their central role in crypto markets, there is relatively little work
studying these derivatives. In this paper we ask: what are the theoretical fundamental
values of perpetual futures, and how large are deviations from these fundamentals
empirically?
Perpetuals are derivatives that allow investors to speculate on or hedge against cryp-
tocurrency price fluctuations using high leverage, without needing to acquire the cryp-
tocurrencies or to roll them over. Like traditional fixed-maturity futures, at initiation,
a long and short counterparty agree on an initial futures price without exchanging any
money, other than posting margin with the exchange. Both parties can enter or exit the
contract at any time, with profits or losses continuously calculated and allocated to each
side’s margin account based on prevailing market prices.
Unlike fixed-maturity futures, perpetuals do not expire. This feature enhances the
liquidity of the contract, as there is no staggering of contracts with different maturities
traded on the exchange, and only a single perpetual futures contract per underlying asset
is listed. Moreover, this instrument does not require market participants to roll over their
futures positions and is traded 24/7.
Because they have no set expiration date, perpetuals are not guaranteed to converge to
the spot price of their underlying asset at any given time, and the usual no-arbitrage prices
for perpetuals are not applicable without additional restrictions. To minimize the gap
between perpetual futures and spot prices, long position holders periodically pay short
position holders a ’funding rate’ proportional to this gap to incentivize trades that narrow
1
===== PAGE 3 =====
it. For example, when the futures price exceeds the spot price, arbitrageurs who borrow
cash to long the spot and simultaneously short the futures would receive the funding rate.
Their trades would tend to increase the spot price and decrease the futures price. A narrow
gap means that perpetual futures offer effective exposure to variation in the spot price of
the underlying asset to hedging and speculating investors. Typically, the funding rate is
paid every eight hours and approximately equals the average futures-spot spread over
the preceding eight hours. Note that the strategy just sketched, commonly referred to
as ’funding rate arbitrage,’ is not risk-free even disregarding margin requirements and
trading costs, simply because there is no predetermined expiration date when the trade
would be unwound at a profit.
We derive no-arbitrage prices for perpetual futures in frictionless markets and derive
no-arbitrage bounds in markets with trading costs. The theoretical perpetual futures price
is proportional to the spot price of the underlying, with a constant of proportionality that
increases in the ratio of the interest rate to a constant that determines the intensity of the
funding rate. The interest rate captures the cost of borrowing cash to finance holding the
underlying, while the funding rate intensity captures the benefit of shorting the futures.
Thus, intuitively, the future-spot spread is larger when the cash borrowing interest rate is
large relative to the funding rate.
Our derivation relies on a weaker notion of arbitrage that we call random-maturity
arbitrage. As its name suggests, unlike traditional riskless arbitrage, we allow the strategy’s
time-to-maturity to be random. At first glance, one might object that such prices are
not truly based on riskless arbitrage. Note, however, that riskless no-arbitrage pricing
is usually just a useful fiction (Pedersen, 2019). For example, in real-world futures
markets, arbitrageurs must maintain a margin account during the entire period in which
the arbitrage trade is open. Temporary worsening of apparent arbitrage opportunities can
lead to liquidations and losses. As the saying goes, an arbitrageur must remain liquid
longer than the market stays irrational. Thus, even arbitrage opportunities that appear to
2
===== PAGE 4 =====
be riskless in theory, may be risky in practice.
Our no-arbitrage prices provide a useful benchmark for perpetual futures and si-
multaneously prescribe a strategy to exploit divergence from these fundamental values.
Motivated by the theoretical understanding, we study the empirical deviations of the
perpetual futures price from the spot. We find that the mean deviation from our
benchmark is modest and statistically insignificant, which suggests that it is a useful
benchmark for futures prices.
Around this benchmark, however, perpetual futures often differ significantly from spot
prices. The mean absolute deviation is about 60% to 90% per year across different cryp-
tocurrencies, which is considerably larger than the deviations documented in traditional
currency markets by Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018). We find strong comovement
of the futures-spot gap across different cryptocurrencies. This comovement can be due
to commonality in funding and market liquidity faced by arbitrageurs who operate in
multiple cryptocurrencies. Common sentiment could also drive the difference in futures
demand relative to the spot. Overall, the deviation’s magnitude is comparable to our
theoretic no-arbitrage bound calibrated to actual trading fees.
Deviations decline on average about 11% a year, consistent with an increase in arbitrage
capital and competition among arbitrageurs (Kondor, 2009). The narrowing gap provides
an additional perspective on the downfall of Alameda Research and Three Arrows Capital.
According to news reports and interviews, both hedge funds seem to have pivoted from
such arbitrage activity around late 2021 to early 2022 and started taking more directional
bets on cryptocurrencies, with both direct unhedged crypto holdings and investments in
crypto startups. The large declines in crypto prices in 2022 subsequently exhausted their
capital and led to their bankruptcies.1
1See, for example, Forbes, November 19, 2022, on How Did Sam Bankman-Fried’s Alameda Research
Lose So Much Money?, Odd Lots, November 17, 2022, on Understanding the Collapse of Sam Bankman-
Fried’s Crypto Empire, and Hugh Hendry’s interview on December 3, 2022 of Kyle Davies on the Collapse
of Three Arrows Capital.
3
===== PAGE 5 =====
To understand the economics of the futures-spot spread, we consider a trading strategy
motivated by the random-maturity arbitrage theory. Whenever the futures-spot spread
exceeds the theoretical bound under certain trading cost tiers, we open the trading position
and close it when the futures-spot spread returns to its theoretical relationship under no
trading costs. We find that empirically, the random maturity arbitrage strategy generates
a sizable Sharpe ratio even under high trading costs. For example, for Bitcoin perpetual
futures, the strategy generates a Sharpe ratio of 1.8 under high trading costs typical of
retail investors, and up to 3.5 for highly-active market makers who pay no such fees. The
strategy’s performance is even better for Ether and other cryptocurrencies and delivers
significant alphas relative to the 3-factor model of Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu (2022) and the
5-factor model of Cong, Karolyi, Tang, and Zhao (2022b).
The strong performance of our simple trading strategy, which exploits deviations
from the random-maturity no-arbitrage bounds we derive, provides compelling evidence
for the usefulness of these bounds as a benchmark for perpetual futures prices. The
strategy generates high Sharpe ratios, even for investors subject to the highest trading
costs on Binance. This indicates that the no-arbitrage prices serve as an effective anchor for
perpetual futures, with profitable random maturity arbitrage opportunities arising when
market prices diverge significantly from these fundamental values. Thus, the success of
the trading strategy underscores the practical value and validity of our theoretical no-
arbitrage results.
What explains these large no-arbitrage deviations? One natural explanation is that
liquidity in crypto markets is insufficient for arbitrageurs to eliminate such violations. Our
finding that the spreads decline over time is consistent with liquidity improving as these
markets develop, and leaves open the possibility that they will narrow going forward. We
also find, however, that past return momentum significantly explains the futures-spot gap
with a time-series regression R2 of more than 50%. When past returns are high, futures
tend to trade at a higher price relative to the spot. This indicates positive feedback or
4
===== PAGE 6 =====
momentum trading behavior in the perpetual futures market. This correlation may linger
even as crypto markets become more efficient.
The existing literature on perpetual futures mainly focuses on empirical evidence. See
e.g. Alexander, Choi, Park, and Sohn (2020), De Blasis and Webb (2022), Ferko, Moin,
Onur, and Penick (2022), and Streltsov and Ruan (2022). Christin, Routledge, Soska, and
Zetlin-Jones (2022) present a novel study on the strategy of longing the spot and shorting
the perpetual futures to understand the demand pressure in the market. They document a
significant return to this trading strategy and attribute the profits to differences of opinion
and leverage constraints in the market. Our paper provides a general explanation for their
findings as perpetual futures are more expensive relative to the theoretical no-arbitrage
price for most of the recent sample period across major cryptocurrencies. Therefore,
longing the spot and shorting the futures would be consistent with arbitrage trading
directions. Angeris, Chitra, Evans, and Lorig (2022) provide a theoretical no-arbitrage
analysis of perpetuals, which relies on a strong assumption that the payoff from the
perpetual is a fixed function of the underlying spot price. Ackerer et al. (2023) derive
no-arbitrage prices for various perpetual contracts in both discrete and continuous-time
by assuming the existence of an equivalent martingale measure. We further relate our
work to both papers below. Overall, compared to the existing literature, we illustrate the
fundamental mechanism behind the perpetual design and derive theoretical no-arbitrage
prices and bounds for this instrument in the presence of trading costs.
Also related is a recent literature on fixed maturity futures in the crypto market.
Schmeling, Schrimpf, and Todorov (2022) provide a comprehensive analysis of the carry
of fixed-maturity crypto futures, with the carry defined following the general definition
of Koijen, Moskowitz, Pedersen, and Vrugt (2018). They document volatile convenience
yields for fixed-maturity crypto futures and attribute this to trend-chasing small investors
and the relative scarcity of arbitrage capital. Cong, He, and Tang (2022a) provide a
novel link of the volatile convenience yield to the staking, service flow, and transaction
5
===== PAGE 7 =====
convenience of the underlying tokens. They show that the large deviation from uncovered
interest rate parity can be reconciled with transaction convenience. Our paper focuses
on perpetual futures rather than fixed maturity futures and extends fixed-maturity to
random-maturity no-arbitrage pricing.
More broadly, our paper contributes to the understanding of frictions and arbitrage
in cryptocurrency markets. Makarov and Schoar (2020) study price deviations across
exchanges. They find large gaps across countries, highlighting the important role played
by capital controls and slow-moving arbitrage capital as in Duffie (2010). Our analysis
focuses on the price wedge between the spot and the futures market. We find that even
within an exchange, futures prices deviate from their theoretical arbitrage-free values.
These results indicate there are significant limits to arbitrage as in Gromb and Vayanos
(2018) for cryptocurrencies in the early years. Finally, our finding that deviations from the
no-arbitrage benchmark in crypto markets are highly correlated across currencies suggests
that a common risk factor drives this variation as documented by Lustig, Roussanov, and
Verdelhan (2011) in traditional currency markets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides the institutional
details and history of perpetual futures. Section 3 presents the no-arbitrage analysis of the
perpetual futures market and derives the theoretical price of perpetual futures. Section
4 demonstrates the empirical futures-spot deviation and presents the simple theory-
motivated trading strategy that can exploit the arbitrage opportunity. Section 5 provides
some explanation for the deviation between futures and the spot. Section 6 concludes.
2 An Introduction to Perpetual Futures
The idea of perpetual futures was first introduced by Shiller (1993). The goal was to set
up a perpetual claim on the cash flows of an illiquid asset. For example, the underlying
6
===== PAGE 8 =====
illiquid asset could be a house that generates rents as cash flows. The purpose of the
perpetual futures is to enable price discovery for the underlying with an illiquid or hard-
to-measure price. Perpetual futures have no expiration date but cash is exchanged between
the long and the short side: after buying the perpetual futures, the long side is entitled
to receive the flow cash flow from the short side and they settle the price difference when
exiting the position.
Figure 1 Total trading volumes of perpetual futures across exchanges
The figure displays the 7-day moving average daily traded volume for perpetual futures across all
exchanges in blue. The median daily volume is$17.8 bn. (2020), $132.0 bn. (2021) and $101.9 bn.
(2022). This translates to a yearly volume of $8,551 bn. (2020), $51,989 bn. (2021) and $39,306
bn. (2022) respectively. Additionally, the grey line depicts the ratio between the traded volume in
perpetuals and spot markets. In 2022 the Perpetual markets are consistently trading between 2x or
3.5x the spot volume. The data is obtained from CoinGecko, a crypto data specialist. We exclude
exchanges that are known for misrepresenting data (e.g. forms of wash trading).
Perpetual futures in crypto markets similarly have no expiration date and cash is
exchanged between the long and the short side, but their purpose is different from Shiller’s
original idea. First, unlike, e.g. real estate market, crypto has no inherent dividend or
cash flow. Second, the price discovery argument of Shiller is most applicable to settings
where spot prices are difficult to measure. Crypto spot prices, however, can be measured
from active trading on different exchanges, and decentralized exchanges such as Bancor
(Hertzog et al., 2017) or Uniswap (Adams et al., 2021) offer price discovery for assets
7
===== PAGE 9 =====
with minimal liquidity. The major role perpetual futures play in the crypto space is to
offer an effective leveraged trading vehicle to hedge or speculate the underlying spot price
movement, which makes the market more complete. It also serves as an effective tax
payment optimization tool for investors.
Crypto perpetual futures were first introduced by BitMEX in 2016, which has gained
great popularity in the crypto space since its inception. It initially served as an effective
hedging tool for crypto miners. It was later adopted by crypto speculators interested in
leveraged exposure. Nowadays, based on data from CoinGecko, the median total daily
trading volume of perpetual futures across all exchanges is 101.9 billion in the year 2022
which is about 2× to 3× the total spot trading volume across these exchanges. Figure 1
presents the 7-day moving average of the total trading volume of perpetual futures across
all exchanges. We see a significant rise in trading of perpetual futures around January
2021 and the total volume stabilizes at a level above$100 billion per day following the rise.
Cong, Li, Tang, and Yang (2022c) document significant wash trading behavior among
crypto exchanges because of competition, the ranking mechanism, and lack of regulation.
They estimate that over 70% of crypto trading volume is not real. Amiram, Lyandres, and
Rabetti (2021) confirm this conclusion using new data and an extended methodology.
Therefore, in calculating trading volume, we exclude exchanges that are known to
misrepresent data.
A key feature of crypto perpetual futures is the funding rate, which is the cash
exchanged between the long and short counterparties. Its goal is to keep the futures
price close to the underlying spot so that the futures can be an effective hedging tool
for spot price movement. The funding rate is typically paid every 8 hours. Its value is
approximately a weighted average of the prior 8 hours’ price gap of the futures and the
spot. If the futures price is above the spot, the funding rate will be positive, meaning the
long side of the futures needs to pay the short side. This incentivizes traders to short the
8
===== PAGE 10 =====
Figure 2 Bitcoin annualized funding rate across exchanges
The figure presents the 7-day moving average annualized funding rate for Bitcoin (BTC) across
exchanges. The data is obtained from Glassnode, an analytics platform. The data covers two
major market turbulences: the COVID stock market crash from February to April 2020 and the
FTX insolvency in November 2022. The FTX collapse led to significant negative funding rates on
all solvent exchanges. Thus, the perpetual future prices were lower than the spot prices on the
solvent exchanges. Vice versa on the insolvent FTX. The funding rates become more volatile after
the event, indicating increased uncertainty for the market participants.
futures, and in doing so, to move its price back in line with the spot. On the other hand,
when the futures price is below the spot, the funding rate turns negative, which means the
short side needs to pay the long side. Therefore, the funding rate is the key mechanism
keeping the futures price close to the spot price.2 Note that perpetual futures cannot be
replicated by rolling over 8-hour maturity futures. For the latter, every 8 hours, the price
is guaranteed to converge to the underlying spot, while for the perpetual futures this is
not the case.
Figure 2 presents the annualized 7-day moving average of Bitcoin perpetual funding
rates across leading exchanges from January 2020 to December 2022. The funding rate is
positive when the futures-to-spot spread is positive, and negative otherwise. Funding
rates tend to be similar across exchanges due to cross-exchange arbitrage activity, but
2https://www.binance.com/en/support/faq/360033525031 provides a detailed explanation of how
the funding rate is calculated. We summarize the mechanism in Appendix B.
9
===== PAGE 11 =====
can diverge during extreme liquidity episodes. During March 2020, as COVID-19 started
to spread and liquidity evaporated, funding rates turned substantially negative in most
exchanges. Funding rates turned highly positive during the crypto bull run of early 2021.
The last episode highlighted is the collapse of FTX, which was the 4th largest crypto
exchange at the time. The figure shows that Bitcoin futures prices were substantially
higher than spot prices at FTX, but the opposite was true on other exchanges. This
pattern is consistent with FTX investors liquidating their short futures positions quickly,
either voluntarily to reduce their exposure to the failing exchange, or involuntarily as the
exchange liquidated their underfunded positions.
3 Arbitrage in Perpetual Futures
We next derive no-arbitrage prices for perpetual futures prices relative to spot prices.
Unlike traditional futures, perpetual futures have no expiration date. To analyze arbitrage
in this market, we extend the traditional notion of risk-free arbitrage, where arbitrageurs
have a guaranteed positive payoff at a certain time in the future. We first describe the
payoff structure of perpetual futures. We then introduce a generalized notion of an
arbitrage opportunity with a certain positive payoff but at an uncertain future time.
Definition 1(Perpetual futures). A perpetual futures contract with price{Ft}∞
t=0 written on an
underlying asset with spot price {St}∞
t=0 is a swap agreement between the long and the short side.
There is no cost to open the position. Once open, both the long side and the short side can terminate
their position at any time t. To stay in the contract, both sides have to meet two requirements. (1)
For each unit of the perpetual, the long and short sides must exchange an Fs−adapted cash-flow
κ(Fs − Ss)ds, s ∈ (0,t), referred to as the funding payment. κ is a scaling parameter determining
the magnitude of the funding rate relative to the price gap. If the value is positive, the long pays
the short, and vice versa. (2) Both sides need to post mark-to-market margins to cover any losses
in their margin accounts.
10
===== PAGE 12 =====
This definition is an approximation of real-world perpetual futures. 3 In most ex-
changes, the funding payment for perpetual futures is paid every 8 hours and approx-
imately equals the average difference between the futures price and the spot over the
8 hours (480 minutes or 1
1095 years). If we measure time units in years, the cumulative
funding rate payment during an 8-hour period is:
Z t+1/1095
t
κ(Fs − Ss)ds.
Consider the case when Ft − St = G, which is constant over the 8-hour interval. In the real
world, the funding rate payment would equalG while in our model, the number is κG
1095.
To equalize the two, we haveκ = 1095.
The traditional notions of arbitrage typically consider a guaranteed positive payoff at
a certain future date.
Definition 2 (Riskless arbitrage). A riskless arbitrage opportunity is defined with respect to a
payoff x at a certain future time τ and its price p(x). If the following conditions are satisfied: (1)
x ≥ 0 almost surely, (2) x > 0 with some positive probability, and (3) its price satisfies p(x) ≤ 0,
then this payoff is an arbitrage opportunity (Cochrane, 2009).
There is no certain future time, however, when a perpetual futures expires and its price
is guaranteed to converge to some fixed function of the spot price. Therefore, a generalized
notion of arbitrage is required. Suppose the risk-free rate is constant. We define random-
maturity arbitrage opportunities as zero-cost strategies with a guaranteed positive payoff
at a bounded uncertain future time. Stated formally:
Definition 3 (Random-maturity arbitrage). A random-maturity arbitrage opportunity is
defined with respect to a random payoff x at a bounded future random time ˜τ < ¯T, and its price
3To avoid price manipulation and volatile funding payments, Binance applies a clamp function to funding
rate payments when the deviation is small. We provide a thorough discussion of the funding rate mechanism
in Appendix B.
11
===== PAGE 13 =====
p(x). If the following conditions are satisfied: (1)x ≥ 0 almost surely, (2)x > 0 with some positive
probability, and (3) its price satisfies p(x) ≤ 0, then this payoff is a random-maturity arbitrage
opportunity.
Definition 3 generalizes traditional arbitrage in the sense that there is a guaranteed
positive payoff but at an uncertain future time. The following corollary specializes this
definition for perpetual futures:
Corollary 1. In the perpetual futures market, if a strategy (1) has 0 cost at time 0, and (2) for
any price path of the futures and the spot,{Ft}∞
t=0 and {St}∞
t=0, there exists a bounded unwinding
time ˜τ such that the strategy’s discounted payoff is positive, then this strategy is a random-maturity
arbitrage.
We next show that when there is no random-maturity arbitrage, the futures price is a
fixed constant times the spot price under the two following assumptions:
Assumption 1. The risk-free short rater in the cash market and the instantaneous interest rate on
the underlying asset r′ are constant.
Assumption 2. The gap between the perpetual futures and its fundamental price is bounded:
supt |Ft(ω) − λ St(ω)| < M, ∀ ω, where λ is a proportionality constant implied by Equation(1).
Assumption 3. The funding rate is larger than the short rate in the cash market:κ > r.
Assumption 1 guarantees that there is no roll-over risk for the arbitrageurs. Assump-
tion 2 is a no-bubble condition, which says that the largest deviation of perpetual futures
from its no-arbitrage price can be bounded by M. Assumption 3 states that the design
of the contract needs to guarantee that the reward for convergence trade is larger than
deploying the capital to the risk-free asset. With these three assumptions, we can state our
result as follows.
12
===== PAGE 14 =====
Proposition 1 (No-arbitrage price). Under Assumptions 1, 2, and 3, there is an absence of
random-maturity arbitrage opportunities if and only if
Ft = κ
κ − (r − r′)St. (1)
Proof. We first show when there are no random maturity arbitrage opportunities, the
perpetual futures price must be given by Equation (1). We establish this using the
conjecture and verify approach.
Firstly, conjecture that the equilibrium futures price is a linear function of the spot:
Ft = λ St, where λ is the parameter to be determined. Consider the following two scenarios
in Table 1. (1)F0 > λ S0; (2)F0 < λ S0. We show in the first case that arbitrageurs would long
the spot and short the futures because this is a random-maturity arbitrage opportunity. We
then show that the opposite strategy is optimal in the second case.
For the payoff given in Table 1, it is worth noting that the mark-to-market margin
requirements indicate any interim futures price changes will affect the payoff of the trader
since she needs to post enough margin to cover losses or can invest the surplus in margin
account in risk-free assets. Moreover, in the cash market, the trader needs to roll over the
short-term debt to finance the position in the spot market. The interest paid from holding
the underlying asset depends on the spot price.
To start off, we need to fixλ. Given our conjecture, ifFt = λ St, both the first and second
strategies in Table 1 should have0 payoff. This condition gives us the following equation:
λ = 1 + (r − r′)λ
κ =⇒ λ = κ
κ − (r − r′).
Next, given this λ, we verify that the deviation shown in Table 1 implies the existence
13
===== PAGE 15 =====
F0 > λ S0 F0 < λ S0
Actions Long λ spot, short 1 futures Long 1 futures, short λ spot
Futures 0 0
Time 0 Spot −λ S0 +λ S0
Cash +λ S0 −λ S0
Time t
Futures −
R t
0 e−rsdFs
R t
0 e−rsdFs
Funding κ
R t
0(Fs − Ss)e−rsds −κ
R t
0(Fs − Ss)e−rsds
Spot λ
R t
0 e−rs(dSs + r′Ssds) −λ
R t
0 e−rs(dSs + r′Ssds)
Cash −λ
R t
0 e−rsrSsds λ
R t
0 e−rsrSsds
Payoff −
R t
0 e−rsd(Fs − λ Ss)+
R t
0 e−rsd(Fs − λ Ss)−
κ
R t
0 e−rs

Fs −

1 + (r−r′)λ
κ

Ss

ds −κ
R t
0 e−rs

Fs −

1 + (r−r′)λ
κ

Ss

ds
Table 1 Discounted payoffs to arbitrage strategies in perpetual futures and spot markets
This table presents the costs and benefits of two arbitrage trading strategies: (1) when F0 > λ S0,
long λ spot and short 1 futures; (2) whenF0 < λ S0, long 1 futures and shortλ spot. In the last row,
the payoff from exiting the position is the discounted payoff from futures and spot price changes,
proceeds from the cash market, and the funding rate.
of random maturity arbitrage opportunities. In what follows, we denote the deviation by:
us ≡ Fs − κ
κ − (r − r′)Ss.
We can then write the payoffs of the two strategies in Table 1 respectively as:
−
Z t
0
e−rsdus + κ
Z t
0
e−rsusds = −e−rtut + u0 + (κ − r)
Z t
0
use−rsds,
Z t
0
e−rsdus − κ
Z t
0
e−rsusds = e−rtut − u0 − (κ − r)
Z t
0
use−rsds,
where the equality follows from integration by parts.
Scenario 1: If F0 > λ S0, consider the first strategy of longing λ spot and shorting 1
futures. We want to show that for any price path of the perpetual futures and the spot,
there exists a bounded future unwinding timet such that the strategy’s payoff is positive,
which would mean this is a random-maturity arbitrage. To prevent the arbitrageur from
14
===== PAGE 16 =====
making a profit, the payoff must be nonpositive at all timest:
−e−rtut| {z }
spread at unwinding
+ u0|{z}
initial spread
+ (κ − r)
Z t
0
use−rsds
| {z }
funding payments
≤ 0. (2)
Consider the first time period when the deviation is positive. That is,us > 0, s ∈ (0, min{t >
0, ut = 0}). Rearrange the terms, the inequality becomes:
e−rtut ≥ u0 + (κ − r)
Z t
0
use−rsds. (3)
Let ut denote a process, implicitly defined by e−rtut = u0 + (κ − r)
R t
0 use−rsds, which
provides a lower bound for all processesut satisfying inequality (3). Solving this integral
equation, we have:
ut = eκtu0.
From the above expression, there exists a time ¯T = log(M)−log(u0)
κ , such that ut ≥ M when
t ≥ ¯T. This implies that ut ≥ M when t ≥ ¯T, which violates Assumption2.
Therefore, ut cannot stay positive in(0, ¯T ). However, if the deviation ever hits0 during
t ∈ (0, ¯T ), this would also make positive profit for the arbitrageur. Consider the first time
the deviation hits 0. The payoff in Equation (2) is positive. In sum, if F0 > λ S0, the
proposed strategy is a random maturity arbitrage.
Scenario 2: Next, if F0 < λ S0, i.e. u0 < 0, consider the second strategy of longing 1
futures and shorting λ spot. As before, we want to show that for this strategy under any
price path of the perpetual futures and the spot, there always exists a bounded future time
t such that the strategy payoff is positive, i.e. this is a random maturity arbitrage. Similarly,
to prevent the arbitrageur from making a profit, the payoff needs to satisfy:
e−rtut ≤ u0 + (κ − r)
Z t
0
use−rsds.
15
===== PAGE 17 =====
Consider the first time period when the deviation is negative, i.e. us < 0, s ∈ (0, min{t >
0, ut = 0}. e−rt ¯ut = u0 + (κ − r)
R t
0 ¯use−rsds provides an upper bound for all processes
satisfying the inequality. This is the same integral equation as we see in the first case.
We have:
¯ut = eκtu0.
From the above expression, there exists ¯T = log(M)−log(−u0)
κ such that ¯ut < −M when t ≥ ¯T.
This implies that ut ≤ −M when t ≥ ¯T, which breaks Assumption 2.
Similar to scenario 1, ut cannot stay negative in (0, ¯T ). However, if it ever hits 0 in the
period, exiting the position the first time the deviation hits0 would be a profitable strategy
for the arbitrageur. Therefore, if F0 < λ S0, the proposed strategy is a random maturity
arbitrage.
In sum, when there is an absence of random maturity arbitrage strategies, the price of
perpetual futures is a fixed constant times the spot price given in Equation (1).
For the opposite direction of proof, when the futures and spot prices satisfy Equation
1, we need to prove that there is no random maturity arbitrage opportunity in the market.
This can be seen easily as any long-short trading strategies would be exposed to the risk
in the spot market as long as the proportion is not the same asλ. Longing or shorting the
spot market is clearly not a random maturity arbitrage opportunity as the time to make a
positive arbitrage profit is not bounded for the arbitrageur.
To gain an intuition for this result, consider the three terms of Equation 2. The first
term is the spread at unwinding discounted to the present. The second term is the initial
spread. The last term is the present value of cumulated funding payments from initiation
to unwinding. The last two terms account for gains to the arbitrageur in this scenario.
The first term is the source of tension here. For fixed-maturity futures, this spread is
guaranteed to be zero at expiration. However, an arbitrageur in perpetual futures faces
16
===== PAGE 18 =====
the risk that when they wish to unwind the trade, the spread may be arbitrarily large.
Our key insight is that a positive and even modestly large spread can still leave the
arbitrageur with a positive payoff because funding payments also increase with the spread.
As long as the spread does not diverge to infinity, there will be some future bounded
unwinding time t when the accumulated funding rate payments overcome any finite
potential losses at unwinding.
Note that if we relax the assumption that the short rate is constant for arbitrageurs,
this may introduce some additional risk to the four parts of terms in Table 1: (1) mark-to-
market changes in futures price; (2) funding-rate payment; (3) reinvestment in the spot
market; (4) rollover of the short-term debt. This extension also relates to the literature
examining the differences between futures and forwards in the context of stochastic
interest rates, such as Cox et al. (1981) and Grinblatt and Jegadeesh (1996). They show
that marking-to-market introduces an additional term in the futures price related to the
covariance between the underlying asset and interest rate. Empirically, however, the
volatility in the short rate is considerably smaller than the volatility in the deviation from
futures to its fundamental price. Moreover, the changes in the short rate have opposite
effects on payment from the cash market and the funding payment, as well as mark-to-
market margin in the futures market and reinvestment in the spot market. Therefore, we
abstract from short-rate randomness here but note it is an interesting avenue for future
work.
Empirically, the arbitrageurs face trading costs when opening or terminating their
positions. Suppose they face a round-trip trading cost ofC. We can derive the no random
maturity arbitrage bounds for perpetual futures.
Proposition 2 (No-arbitrage bound). Under Assumption 1 and 2, when there is a round-
trip trading cost C of executing the trading strategy, the absence of random-maturity arbitrage
opportunities implies that perpetual futures price will lie within the following bound relative to the
17
===== PAGE 19 =====
spot:
|Ft − κ
κ − (r − r′)St| ≤C. (4)
Proof. Similar to the proof of proposition 1, consider the following two scenarios.
Scenario 1: If F0 > λ S0 +C, then we show the strategy of longingλ spot and shorting
1 futures is a random-maturity arbitrage strategy with trading cost. To prevent the
arbitrageur from making a profit, now the payoff needs to satisfy:
−e−rtut + u0 −C + (κ − r)
Z t
0
use−rsds ≤ 0.
Following the same argument as in the proof of proposition 1, we can find the lower bound
process ut as:
ut = (u0 −C)eκt.
When u0 > C, this process will explode toward M at an exponential rate. Following the
same argument as in proof proposition 1, the proposed trading strategy is a random-
maturity arbitrage strategy.
Scenario 2: If F0 < λ S0 −C, then we show the strategy of longing 1 futures and shorting
λ spot is a random-maturity arbitrage strategy despite the trading cost. Now, the payoff
needs to satisfy the following condition to prevent the arbitrageur from making a profit:
e−rtut − u0 −C − (κ − r)
Z t
0
use−rsds ≤ 0.
Similar to the argument in scenario 2 of proposition 1, we can find the upper bound process
as:
¯ut = (u0 +C)eκt.
When u0 < −C, this process will explode towardM at an exponential rate. With the same
argument, the proposed trading strategy is again a random-maturity arbitrage strategy.
18
===== PAGE 20 =====
In sum, with trading cost, the absence of random maturity arbitrage opportunity
implies that the futures price lies within a bound relative to the spot: λ St − C ≤ Ft ≤
λ St +C.
In the presence of trading costs, when the deviation of the perpetual futures price
from λ St, is larger than the round-trip trading costs C, arbitrageurs would have a strong
incentive to trade perpetual futures toward the price λ St. Proposition 2 also prescribes
a trading strategy to exploit the futures-spot divergence in markets with different levels
of trading costs. In the next section, we provide an empirical analysis of the futures-spot
deviation and present arbitrage trading strategies motivated by our theory.
Before turning to the data, we pause to relate our results to two recent theoretical
contributions. Angeris et al. (2022) consider an inverse problem to our setting. It assumes
there is no arbitrage and that the perpetual futures price is a function of the spot, and
derives the funding rate process that is consistent with the pricing formula. This takes
a perspective of security design. However, empirically, funding rate mechanisms are
predetermined and fixed for traders. Moreover, because of the limits of arbitrage, futures
prices can deviate from the fixed function set by the designer. Our approach prescribes
a strategy to exploit divergence from the fundamental price and offers a closer alignment
with real-world trading conditions.
Compared to Ackerer et al. (2023), our initial draft, disseminated December 2022 (see
https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06888v1), considers the case when the underlying pays
no interest r′ = 0. It shows that the absence of random-maturity arbitrage opportunities
implies the price of perpetual futures lies within the following bound relative to the spot:
|Ft −

1 + r
κ

St| ≤C, (5)
19
===== PAGE 21 =====
and that in the case without trading costs, the price would be
Ft =

1 + r
κ

St. (6)
Ackerer et al. (2023, https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.11771v1), dated October 2023,
uses a different set of assumptions and solution method to derive no-arbitrage prices for
more general perpetual contracts including the one we study. In their paper, the price
relevant for the case we analyzed is:
Ft = κ
κ − r St. (7)
Their paper further pointed out an inconsistency in the cash flow specification in our
original derivation. After correcting this issue, Equation (1) above is consistent with their
derivation in this case, and they deserve credit for deriving the correct formula first.4
While different, to a first-order approximation, equations (6) and (7) are equivalent.
Because our empirical analysis relies on first-order approximations for the deviations, the
correction did not change any of our estimators. Moreover, the difference between the two
benchmarks is negligible in practice becauseκ is much larger than r.
An advantage of our derivation is that it makes explicit the arbitrage trading strategy
in case of deviations and provides bounds in the case of trading costs which we use in our
empirical analysis. Another difference is that we assume that the deviations between the
futures and spot are bounded, whereas Ackerer et al. (2023) assume that a transversality
condition holds such that the futures price (and therefore the spot) grows at a slow enough
rate relative to the funding payments intensityκ. But even under their assumptions, it can
be shown that strategies aimed at arbitrage of deviations from their benchmark prices are
necessarily random-maturity arbitrage strategies, as we emphasize here.
4We thank Damien Ackerer, Julien Hugonnier, and Urban Jermann for the comments that helped clarify
the issue.
20
===== PAGE 22 =====
4 Data and Empirical Analysis
We conduct an empirical analysis of perpetual futures arbitrage strategies. We first
describe the data. We then measure the deviations of the crypto futures-spot spread
from the no-arbitrage benchmark. Finally, we implement a trading strategy that exploits
deviations from random-maturity no-arbitrage bounds and quantify the gains from this
strategy net of trading costs.
4.1 Data
We focus on the five largest cryptocurrencies excluding stablecoins: Bitcoin (BTC), Ether
(ETH), BNB (BNB), Dogecoin (DOGE), and Cardano (ADA) with a total market cap of
$1.83 trillion, which account for 73.2% of the total market share of the Crypto market by
March 2024.
For each token, we obtain perpetual futures and spot prices at a 1-hour frequency from
Binance. Binance is by far the leading exchange in the crypto realm. Another major benefit
of using the Binance data is: nearly every part of our trading strategies can be completed
within the same platform without delay in transferring funds. As such, it approximates
the real-world investment opportunities faced by traders.
We retrieve the perpetual funding rates from Binance. The funding rate is paid every
8 hours on Binance. So we have futures and spot prices every hour and realized funding
rate payment at 8:00, 16:00, and 0:00 GMT each day. The perpetual and spot tradings occur
24 hours per day and 7 days a week so there are no after-market hours in this market.
We get the earliest possible data on perpetual futures trading from Binance. The table
below lists the starting and ending dates of our data for each cryptocurrency. Our data
ends on 2024-03-11, covering the fallout of the FTX.
21
===== PAGE 23 =====
Asset Start date End date N
BTC 2020-01-08 2024-03-11 36,578
ETH 2020-01-08 2024-03-11 36,578
BNB 2020-02-10 2024-03-11 35,777
DOGE 2020-07-10 2024-03-11 32,152
ADA 2020-01-31 2024-03-11 36,017
Table 2 Sample descriptions
This table presents the sample start and end dates for the five cryptocurrencies and their total
number of observations.
We obtain trading costs from Binance’s website5. In general, trading costs for the spot
market are significantly larger than those for the perpetual futures for similar trading
volume because futures are typically traded with leverage. Fee tiers are attributed to
the 30-day trading volume. We attribute high trading costs with a 30-day spot trading
volume above$1 million and futures trading volume above$15 million (small individual
trader). Medium trading costs are attributed to a 30-day spot trading volume above$150
million and futures trading volume above$1 billion (small funds). Low trading costs are
attributed to a 30-day spot trading volume above $2 billion and futures trading volume
above 12.5 billion (large funds). Zero fees can be negotiated with customized contracts,
for example, for market makers. We consider trading costs for makers instead of takers
because institutions typically trade maker orders.6
Table 3 presents the specification of different trading costs. It also shows the random-
maturity arbitrage bound for the deviation between the perpetual futures and the no-
arbitrage price ( ρl and ρu). The bounds become wider as the trading costs increase.
Detailed explanations of the trading costs specifications are also provided in appendix
Figure 6 and Figure 7.
5https://www.binance.com/en/fee/trading provides data on trading fees in perpetual futures and the
spot market
6Takers trade market orders while makers trade limit orders. Takers take liquidity from the market while
makers make the market or provide liquidity to the market.
22
===== PAGE 24 =====
Fee tier Spot Futures ρl ρu
No 0% 0% 0.0% 0.0%
Low 0.0225% 0.0018% -53.2% 53.2%
Medium 0.045% 0.0072% -114.4% 114.3%
High 0.0675% 0.0144% -179.5% 179.2%
Table 3 Trading costs tiers
Fee tiers are assigned based on past 30-day trading volume. High fees correspond to a 30-day
trading volume above$1mn in spot and above$15mn in perpetuals, typically an individual trader.
Medium fees attribute to a 30-day trading volume above $150mn in spot and above $1bn in
perpetuals (small funds). Low fees are attributed to a 30-day trading volume above$2bn in spot
and above $12.5bn in perpetuals (large funds). The no-fee tier can be negotiated with customized
contracts, for example for market makers. We also report the theory implied no arbitrage bound (ρl
and ρu) for ρ under different trading cost specifications. They are calculated using the following
formulas: ρl = κlog (1 −C), ρu = κlog (1 +C), where C is the round-trip percentage trading costs of
the long-short strategy of perpetual and spot.
In addition to the direct trading fees, traders also face bid-ask spread and price impact
costs in our arbitrage strategies. To assess the importance of such indirect trading costs,
we attain from Kaiko a high-frequency sample with one month of order book snapshots
taken every 30 seconds. With this data, we estimate that the average bid-ask spread for
perpetual futures is less than 0.05 bps, and the price impact of a trade with a size equal to
0.5 million is less than 0.3 bps. Combined, these indirect costs are less than 0.35 bps, which
is substantially smaller than our direct trading fees. Therefore, we focus our analysis on
the direct trading fees, as they are the dominant form of trading costs for our arbitrage
strategies.
To measure the deviation from the no-arbitrage price, we also obtain the interest rate
data from Aave, a leading open-source DeFi liquidity protocol. Customers on Aave
can either be suppliers or borrowers of cryptocurrencies. Because of the anonymity
and decentralization of the DeFi system, all borrowings are over-collateralized and the
collateral can serve as an additional supply to the system for borrowing. The customers
can also supply spare currencies to the system to earn an interest rate. The supply
23
===== PAGE 25 =====
interest rate is typically different from the borrowing interest rate. Both interest rates and
their wedge are determined algorithmically based on the market condition of supply and
demand. We use interest rates from this platform because we believe it is a good proxy for
the funding condition in the crypto market. Our results are robust if we use the interest
rate from the traditional financial market.7
Our theory indicates using a risk-free rate available to the arbitrageurs. Therefore, we
consider the interest rates on the stablecoins, which are not subject to volatile spot price
movement and are the currency of denomination for perpetual futures margins. There are
three major stablecoins traded on Aave: USDT, USDC, and DAI. To get a robust measure
of the risk-free rate, we take an average of the three interest rates to arrive at our final
risk-free supply and borrowing rate for the arbitrageurs.
We plot the time-series evolvement of the interest rate in the appendix Figure 8. During
the early years, we see higher interest rate volatility due to the funding liquidity of the
DeFi platform. In later samples, interest rates are more stable and approach interest rates
in traditional financial markets.
Our interest rate data starts from 2020-01-08. Therefore, for coins with perpetual data
available before the time (BTC and ETH), we begin the analysis from 2020-01-08. For
other coins (BNB, DOGE, ADA), we begin the analysis from the time when they have
data available.
7We also run our analysis using daily T-bill rates obtained from Kenneth French’s website at https:
//mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library/f-f_factors.html. The results
are very close to ones using crypto market supply and borrowing rates.
24
===== PAGE 26 =====
4.2 Deviations of perpetual futures from no-arbitrage benchmarks
The focus of our empirical analysis is the annualized deviation ρ, defined as the interest
rate spread that would rationalize an observed future-spot spread:
F = S κ
κ − (r + ρ − r′).
For example, an estimatedρ of one percentage point would mean that borrowing costs in
the cash market faced by arbitrageurs would have to be one percentage point higher than
the prevailing interest rater in the cash market for the futures-spot gap to be arbitrage-free.
Using f and s to denote log(F) and log(S) respectively, we obtain the following
approximate equation for ρ:
ρ = κ

1 − e−( f −s)

− (r − r′) ≈ κ( f − s) − (r − r′). (8)
This definition is the same in spirit to Du et al. (2018), who measure covered interest
parity (CIP) deviations with the wedge that would equate the dollar borrowing rate and
the synthetic dollar borrowing rate. For the rest of our paper, we focus on the approximate
measure and note that, in our setting, no interest is paid on spot crypto holdings (r′ = 0).8
Each hour, we calculateρ defined in Equation (8) using data on the perpetual futures
price, spot price, and the crypto risk-free interest rate. When the perpetual futures price
is above the spot, an arbitrageur would short the futures and long the spot, and would
finance her position by borrowing in the cash market (as is shown in Table 1). Therefore,
we use the borrowing rate from Aave as the risk-free rate. On the other hand, when the
perpetual futures price is below the spot, an arbitrageur would long the futures, short the
spot, and invest the proceeds from shorting in the cash market (as is shown in Table 1).
In such cases, we use the supply rate from Aave as the risk-free rate.
8The difference between the exact and the approximate measure is negligible.
25
===== PAGE 27 =====
2020-07 2021-01 2021-07 2022-01 2022-07 2023-01 2023-07 2024-01
-300%
-200%
-100%
0%
100%
200%
300%
400%
Annualized percentage point deviation, 
BTC
ETH
BNB
DOGE
ADA
Figure 3 Deviations of perpetual futures from no-arbitrage benchmarks
This figure presents the 7-day moving averages of the annualized deviation of the perpetual
futures-spot spread from the no-arbitrage benchmark for the five cryptocurrencies.
ρ |ρ|
Asset Mean Median Std p-value Mean Median Std p-value
BTC -0.06 -0.32 0.74 0.80 0.57 0.51 0.48 0.00
ETH 0.04 -0.24 0.85 0.31 0.63 0.53 0.57 0.00
BNB -0.10 -0.17 1.22 0.85 0.88 0.70 0.85 0.00
DOGE 0.01 -0.28 1.38 0.45 0.86 0.64 1.07 0.00
ADA 0.03 -0.21 1.14 0.39 0.83 0.70 0.79 0.00
Table 4 Summary Statistics for Deviations from No-arbitrage Prices
The table below summarizes statistics forρ and |ρ| across various crypto tokens. pNW corresponds
to the Newey-West adjusted p-value, testing the null hypothesis that the meanρ (or |ρ|) is zero.
The sample periods are shown in Table 2.
Table 4 reports summary statistics for ρ and |ρ| in our sample. As can be seen, the
mean future-spot spread is modest, lying between −2 and 12 percentage points. The
p-values show we cannot reject the hypothesis that the deviations are zero on average.
Thus, on average, our theoretical prices provide a useful benchmark. Around this
26
===== PAGE 28 =====
benchmark, however, perpetual futures prices vary significantly from spot prices. The
mean absolute deviation is about 60% to 90% per year across different cryptocurrency
tokens. Figure 3 depicts the 7-day moving average of ρ for each of the five examined
cryptocurrencies. It reveals considerable comovement in futures-spot spreads across these
cryptocurrencies, suggesting a common factor at play that drives the observed divergence.
This observation is corroborated by Table 5, which demonstrates high correlations among
futures-spot deviations across the different cryptocurrencies. This trend underscores the
interconnectedness of cryptocurrency markets and is consistent with the comovement of
traditional currencies documented by Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011).
One hypothesis for this significant comovement in ρ across various cryptocurrencies
pertains to time-varying funding constraints encountered by arbitrageurs in the market
(Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009; Garleanu and Pedersen, 2011). Because arbitrageurs
often serve as marginal traders in all markets, their funding constraints are potentially
reflected in the ρ across all major cryptocurrency markets. Our theoretical and empirical
analyses underscore the importance of measuring ρ. Doing so not only sheds light on
potential market stress but also provides a gauge for the shadow costs associated with the
trading and funding constraints arbitrageurs face.
Conversely, from the demand side, shared sentiment across various cryptocurrencies
could also contribute to explaining the concurrent movement ofρ across different markets.
Our theoretical analysis suggests that arbitrageurs will only meet the market demand if the
price deviation surpasses the combined trading and funding costs. As a result, the overall
market sentiment in the futures market relative to the spot market becomes evident in the
price difference between futures and spot prices. If the sentiment across different markets
is influenced by a common factor, we would anticipate a significant comovement in the
futures-spot spread.
Moreover, arbitrageurs are willing to absorb the idiosyncratic demand first because
27
===== PAGE 29 =====
Arbitrage Deviation Funding Rate Spot Return
ρET H ρBNB ρDOGE ρADA f rBTC f rET H f rBNB f rDOGE f rADA RBTC RET H RBNB RDOGE RADA
Arbitrage Deviation ρBTC 0.89 0.58 0.76 0.82 0.85 0.76 0.57 0.55 0.69 0.00 0.05 0.08 0.10 0.05
ρET H 0.61 0.76 0.84 0.76 0.84 0.57 0.53 0.70 0.08 0.11 0.12 0.12 0.10
ρBNB 0.58 0.56 0.56 0.56 0.88 0.47 0.52 0.02 0.07 0.06 0.06 0.07
ρDOGE 0.78 0.65 0.64 0.55 0.79 0.69 0.10 0.14 0.18 0.01 0.11
ρADA 0.70 0.69 0.52 0.56 0.83 0.07 0.12 0.14 0.11 0.09
Funding Rate f rBTC 0.86 0.65 0.63 0.74 0.06 0.09 0.15 0.13 0.10
f rET H 0.63 0.58 0.74 0.11 0.16 0.18 0.17 0.14
f rBNB 0.55 0.60 0.04 0.09 0.11 0.10 0.10
f rDOGE 0.68 0.12 0.14 0.23 -0.01 0.13
f rADA 0.10 0.15 0.21 0.16 0.12
Spot Return RBTC 0.84 0.71 0.46 0.70
RET H 0.73 0.43 0.74
RBNB 0.34 0.65
RDOGE 0.42
Table 5 Correlation of arbitrage deviation (ρ), funding rate (f r), and spot returns (R)
This table presents the correlation among different cryptocurrencies’ futures-spot deviationρ (rows 3 to 7), funding rate (rows 8 to 12),
and spot returns (rows 13 to 16).
28
===== PAGE 30 =====
combining the arbitrage trades across different idiosyncratic deviations would generate
a high Sharpe ratio strategy as in Kozak et al. (2018). Therefore, in equilibrium, after
arbitrageurs have absorbed the idiosyncratic demand, we anticipate the emergence of
a common factor in deviations across different cryptocurrencies, driven by limits to
arbitrage.
In Section 5, we delve deeper into explaining the futures-spot spread. Our results
demonstrate that the past returns of each cryptocurrency serve as significant explanatory
variables for the time-series variation in the spread.
Interestingly, the correlation between deviations and spot market returns is quite
modest. Although spot market returns are highly correlated among themselves, in
line with the strong market factor results from Liu et al. (2022), and no-arbitrage price
deviations are highly correlated among themselves, it appears that different forces drive
these distinct phenomena.
Furthermore, we find that after the year 2022, futures-spot spreads become smaller in
magnitude and less volatile compared to earlier years. The 7-day moving average stays
around -50% most of the time for the five cryptocurrencies while larger sways in earlier
years are quite common. This suggests the market is becoming increasingly efficient. In
terms of the sign of the deviation, which appears to stabilize at the negative region, two
forces are potentially at play: (1) on the futures customer end, the relative demand in
the futures market is weaker compared to the spot; (2) for arbitrageurs, because of the
lack of infrastructure to short the cryptos in the spot market (high shorting costs), their
funding constraints would be larger in the negative region. All these forces contribute to
the stabilization of the futures spot deviation around−50 percentage points.
Last but not least, by design, ρ is also highly correlated with the funding rate. The
funding rate does not correlate perfectly with ρ because in real-world implementations:
(1) there is a clamp region, within which the funding rate is fixed at 0.01%; (2) the funding
29
===== PAGE 31 =====
rate is calculated as a weighted average of futures-spot price deviations, with larger weight
given to more recent observations; (3) in calculating the funding rate, Binance does not
just consider the quote price, they also use an impact margin notional to consider price
impact of the trade.9
4.3 Random-maturity Arbitrage Strategy
We next provide a trading strategy motivated by our random-maturity arbitrage theory.
Table 3 reports for different trading cost tiers, the bounds (ρl and ρu) beyond which there
exist random-maturity arbitrage opportunities. We consider a simple trading strategy:
whenever ρ enters the region outside the annualized round-trip trading costs in Table 3,
we open the position. We close the position whenρ first goes back to 0.
Figure 4 provides an illustration of the trading strategy. When the deviation is beyond
the orange lines, the strategy opens a trading position. The position is closed when the
futures/spot deviation first hits the red line. We present trading thresholds across different
trading costs for different currencies in Figure 9 in the appendix. Different trading
strategies have the same close-position line, which is equal to 0, while the open-position
line adjusts to the level of trading costs. In Appendix C, we also present the performance of
a data-driven strategy that determines the open and close threshold optimally using the
past 6-month data. The data-driven strategy can potentially improve upon this simpler
strategy.
Since our trading strategy is a threshold trading rule, to annualize Sharpe ratios we
follow Lucca and Moench (2015), which considers a trading strategy that is only active on
FOMC announcement dates. We first calculate the mean (µ) and standard deviation (σ)
of our trading strategy during the time it is active. Next, we scale µ/σ by the number of
9See https://www.binance.com/en/support/faq/360033525031 for details of the funding rate calcula-
tion.
30
===== PAGE 32 =====
2020-07 2021-01 2021-07 2022-01 2022-07 2023-01 2023-07 2024-01
-300%
-200%
-100%
0%
100%
200%
300%
400%
Annualized percentage point deviation, 
BTC
open
close
Figure 4 Random-maturity Arbitrage Strategy: Bitcoin, high trading costs
Futures-spot deviations and trading thresholds of the random-maturity arbitrage strategy we
implement for BTC under high trading costs. Each blue dot in the figure represents the hourly
deviation of futures from the spot ρ = κ( f − s) − r. The number is annualized for ease of
interpretation. The orange line is the open-position threshold, and the red line is the close-position
threshold.
periods the strategy is active in a year:
SR = µ
σ
√Na ,
where µ and σ are average hourly returns and Na is the average number of hours the
strategy is active in a year. We follow the same approach to annualize the returns and
standard deviations: µann = µNa, σann = σ √Na.
Table 6 presents the strategy’s performance under different fee tiers. As trading costs
decrease, the random-maturity arbitrage strategy engages in more active trading, leading
to an increase in the SRs and a decrease in the average duration of open-to-close positions.
The strategy also delivers highly significant alphas relative to the 3-factor model by Liu
et al. (2022) and the 5-factor model by Cong et al. (2022a). Evidently, the strategy’s
31
===== PAGE 33 =====
Fee tiers
No Low Medium High
BTC SR 3.53 2.20 2.16 1.80
Return 13.70 8.40 7.93 6.38
Volatility 3.88 3.82 3.68 3.55
MaxDD -4.24 -4.42 -4.34 -4.43
α 13.36 6.46 5.94 4.38
tα 5.34 2.76 2.58 1.89
Active % 100.00 85.28 36.03 20.06
OtC time 19.22 86.73 106.21 134.94
ETH SR 4.83 2.95 2.86 2.55
Return 21.23 12.71 11.61 9.59
Volatility 4.40 4.30 4.06 3.76
MaxDD -4.13 -4.21 -3.91 -3.94
α 26.00 13.62 11.80 9.49
tα 7.26 4.31 4.06 3.54
Active % 99.94 83.93 40.35 22.68
OtC time 14.57 52.60 82.95 83.71
BNB SR 12.31 7.40 5.76 4.84
Return 54.81 31.32 23.30 18.41
Volatility 4.45 4.23 4.05 3.80
MaxDD -1.12 -1.12 -1.10 -1.11
α 71.39 36.63 26.11 20.36
tα 12.30 8.60 7.73 6.82
Active % 99.89 88.10 63.12 35.02
OtC time 7.87 15.66 24.84 27.28
DOGE SR 10.35 6.69 4.85 3.58
Return 75.13 46.35 32.88 23.31
Volatility 7.26 6.93 6.78 6.51
MaxDD -8.56 -8.56 -8.56 -8.56
α 146.40 70.40 42.80 27.04
tα 8.49 6.69 5.59 4.54
Active % 99.29 88.59 64.58 28.79
OtC time 7.36 12.59 16.45 13.82
ADA SR 10.43 5.53 3.46 2.68
Return 54.83 27.87 16.89 12.03
Volatility 5.26 5.04 4.88 4.49
MaxDD -4.30 -4.26 -4.29 -4.35
α 89.20 37.49 19.10 11.99
tα 14.32 11.01 7.50 5.15
Active % 98.90 88.42 67.43 34.60
OtC time 7.57 14.36 28.44 40.58
Table 6 Performance of Random-maturity Arbitrage Strategy
Performance under different trading cost tiers. The fees for spot (futures) are 2.25 (0.18) bps, 4.5
(0.72) bps, and 6.75 (1.44) bps for the low, medium, and high trading cost levels. Statistics reported
are the annualized Sharpe ratio, return (%), volatility (%), max drawdown (%), alpha (%), t-stat of
the alpha, proportion of time the strategy is active (%), and average open-to-close (OtC) position
duration in hours. The returns reported are excess returns from the random maturity arbitrage
strategies. The 3-factor data from Liu et al. (2022) used to calculate alpha ends on April 9th, 2023.
32
===== PAGE 34 =====
performance cannot be explained by previously suggested risk factors.
Table 7 and Table 8 zoom in and present the trading performance of the strategy under
high trading costs. We consider two cases: (1) unrestricted and (2) long-spot only. We
consider the second case because, in earlier years of crypto derivatives, the infrastructure
for shorting cryptocurrencies was not well-developed. We find that, as is implied by our
theory, whenever the deviation between futures and spot is larger than the trading costs,
performing a random-maturity arbitrage strategy would generate returns with high SR.
After trading costs, the strategy generates an SR of 1.80 for BTC and much higher SRs for
other cryptocurrencies.
Table 7 also shows that over time, the perpetual futures market seems to become more
efficient. As we can see in 2022, the deviation of crypto price from the arbitrage-free bound
is less frequent compared to earlier years. But when the deviation happens, the resulting
SR from the trade remains high.
Comparing the results with Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018), we find that deviations
in crypto perpetual futures are considerably larger in magnitude. As a result, gains from
the arbitrage strategies we study are also larger. Even though the volatility of the trading
strategy also scales up, the Sharpe ratios in the crypto space are still larger than those in
the traditional foreign exchange market, as reported in Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018).
When a futures-spot gap opens up, gains from the trading strategy could potentially
arise from two main sources: price convergence and funding rate payments. While
industry publications usually emphasize the funding rate channel, we note that price
convergence can generate quicker gains from arbitrage if dislocations are short-lived. To
examine these two sources empirically, in Table 9, we provide a decomposition of the
trading strategy’s performance into price convergence versus funding rate payment. We
find that price convergence plays a dominant role in total trading returns, while funding
rate payments have a more minor role, which seems to diminish over time.
33
===== PAGE 35 =====
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 All
BTC SR 2.26 2.39 0.70 1.32 11.52 1.80
Return 8.29 14.81 0.28 1.11 11.97 6.38
Volatility 3.67 6.18 0.40 0.84 1.04 3.55
MaxDD -1.90 -4.43 -0.29 -0.24 -0.15 -4.43
Active % 28.66 34.43 9.21 7.68 22.18 20.06
OtC time 94.00 141.52 402.50 223.33 185.50 134.94
N 8,616 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,578
ETH SR 3.08 3.52 1.29 1.64 10.70 2.55
Return 17.12 18.08 1.19 1.81 10.98 9.59
Volatility 5.55 5.13 0.92 1.10 1.03 3.76
MaxDD -3.94 -2.49 -0.45 -0.30 -0.16 -3.94
Active % 37.80 34.91 8.23 10.35 20.93 22.68
OtC time 78.54 67.81 102.14 180.40 175.00 83.71
N 8,616 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,578
BNB SR 6.04 6.60 2.83 2.96 4.31 4.84
Return 31.23 33.13 5.01 6.27 15.11 18.41
Volatility 5.18 5.02 1.77 2.12 3.51 3.80
MaxDD -1.11 -0.89 -0.77 -0.76 -0.65 -1.11
Active % 55.23 48.03 16.54 18.93 53.39 35.02
OtC time 23.17 21.44 54.77 41.62 61.21 27.28
N 7,815 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 35,777
DOGE SR 4.90 5.93 1.49 0.85 2.75 3.58
Return 59.81 53.43 1.53 0.68 6.78 23.31
Volatility 12.20 9.01 1.02 0.79 2.46 6.51
MaxDD -8.56 -2.86 -0.44 -0.43 -0.93 -8.56
Active % 60.12 49.19 16.92 8.37 12.72 28.79
OtC time 6.20 18.22 32.68 243.67 70.33 13.82
N 4,190 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 32,152
ADA SR 3.88 3.41 2.33 1.12 2.23 2.68
Return 21.35 24.19 3.05 1.63 5.02 12.03
Volatility 5.51 7.09 1.31 1.45 2.25 4.49
MaxDD -1.73 -4.35 -0.45 -0.43 -0.83 -4.35
Active % 47.61 42.18 28.52 25.24 13.20 34.60
OtC time 29.53 40.62 32.03 236.89 110.50 40.58
N 8,055 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,017
Table 7 Performance of Unrestricted Trading Strategy Over Time: High Trading Costs
Tier
This table presents the Sharpe ratios, annualized returns (%), standard deviations (%), maximum
drawdowns (%), active percentages (%), and the average open-to-close time (hours) of the
unrestricted random-maturity arbitrage trading strategies for five different cryptocurrencies with
high trading costs. For the unrestricted trading strategy, both longing and shorting the spot are
allowed. The returns reported are excess returns from the random maturity arbitrage strategies.
The success of the trading strategy supports the theory of random-maturity arbitrage.
Whenever there is a deviation larger than the gap implied by the theory, betting on
34
===== PAGE 36 =====
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 All
BTC SR 1.98 2.28 0.51 0.87 11.52 1.62
Return 6.43 13.95 0.08 0.26 11.97 5.49
Volatility 3.25 6.13 0.17 0.30 1.04 3.40
MaxDD -1.90 -4.43 -0.04 -0.24 -0.15 -4.43
Active % 22.28 32.15 0.02 2.85 22.18 14.66
OtC time 111.94 198.36 1.00 124.00 185.50 147.92
N 8,616 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,578
ETH SR 2.57 3.36 0.81 1.16 10.70 2.23
Return 13.98 17.14 0.53 0.48 10.98 8.15
Volatility 5.44 5.09 0.66 0.42 1.03 3.66
MaxDD -3.94 -2.49 -0.26 -0.30 -0.16 -3.94
Active % 34.48 34.59 0.08 3.76 20.93 18.29
OtC time 122.79 74.10 1.33 108.67 175.00 93.21
N 8,616 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,578
BNB SR 4.46 4.99 0.76 0.73 2.24 3.29
Return 15.34 21.91 0.16 0.28 3.02 8.96
Volatility 3.44 4.39 0.21 0.38 1.35 2.73
MaxDD -1.11 -0.87 -0.04 -0.12 -0.52 -1.11
Active % 35.00 31.30 0.07 2.26 9.16 16.31
OtC time 30.08 23.73 2.00 23.75 76.00 26.92
N 7,815 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 35,777
DOGE SR 2.64 5.03 1.03 0.49 2.75 2.52
Return 31.16 36.20 0.25 0.08 6.78 14.37
Volatility 11.80 7.19 0.24 0.16 2.46 5.71
MaxDD -8.56 -2.86 -0.04 -0.08 -0.93 -8.56
Active % 37.49 41.92 0.05 0.73 12.72 17.18
OtC time 7.49 26.12 1.00 63.00 70.33 15.96
N 4,190 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 32,152
ADA SR 3.16 2.94 - 0.88 2.23 2.11
Return 16.03 20.32 - 0.51 5.02 8.89
Volatility 5.08 6.92 - 0.58 2.25 4.21
MaxDD -1.73 -4.44 0.00 -0.43 -0.83 -4.44
Active % 36.52 39.57 0.00 3.46 13.20 19.25
OtC time 36.25 48.70 - 100.00 110.50 44.34
N 8,055 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,017
Table 8 Performance of Long-spot-only Trading Strategy Over Time: High Trading Costs
Tier
This table presents the Sharpe ratios, annualized returns (%), standard deviations (%), maximum
drawdowns (%), active percentages (%), and the average open-to-close time (hours) of the long-
spot only random-maturity arbitrage trading strategies for five different cryptocurrencies with high
trading costs. For the long-spot-only strategy, shorting the spot is not allowed. The returns reported
are excess returns from the random maturity arbitrage strategies. In 2022, for ADA, there is no
positive deviation of rho from the high-trading cost threshold. Therefore, the trading strategy is
not active during the year for ADA.
35
===== PAGE 37 =====
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 All
BTC Return 21.68 29.60 0.35 2.65 17.21 13.70
Price 14.00 14.29 2.29 3.59 11.19 8.64
Funding 7.68 15.31 -1.94 -0.94 6.03 5.06
ETH Return 40.93 36.66 3.15 5.52 15.95 21.23
Price 27.58 19.07 3.68 5.75 8.97 13.73
Funding 13.35 17.59 -0.53 -0.24 6.97 7.49
BNB Return 82.48 76.29 27.75 39.14 36.92 54.81
Price 66.70 60.37 21.69 32.26 21.68 43.58
Funding 15.78 15.92 6.06 6.89 15.24 11.23
DOGE Return 220.81 113.79 42.59 8.76 25.98 75.13
Price 214.72 93.24 43.59 8.51 15.74 68.40
Funding 6.09 20.55 -1.00 0.25 10.24 6.72
ADA Return 90.81 66.73 43.48 23.56 42.55 54.83
Price 77.17 49.51 42.67 23.71 32.92 46.98
Funding 13.64 17.22 0.81 -0.15 9.64 7.85
Table 9 Return Decomposition: Price Convergence vs Funding Rate Payment for
Random-maturity Arbitrage Strategies
This table decomposes the portfolio return into the part due to price convergence and the part
due to funding rate payment. The returns reported are excess returns from the random-maturity
arbitrage strategies. There are a few negative funding rate payments due to the difference in the
empirical specification of funding rate payment (see Appendix B for details) with our theoretical
framework when the deviation is small.
convergence tends to generate a positive payoff at some uncertain future time. Therefore,
the convergence arbitrage trade generates high Sharpe ratios.
5 Explaining Futures-spot Deviations
From Figure 3, we observe a strong common comovement of the futures-spot deviation
across all crypto assets. Our goal is to understand the fundamental forces driving this
common factor. We consider two potential hypotheses: (1) the time-varying funding
constraints of arbitrageurs and (2) the time-varying relative demand from end-users for
perpetual futures compared to the spot.
36
===== PAGE 38 =====
Both forces could potentially explain these patterns. Arbitrageurs will accommodate
the relative demand from end-users only until the price deviation lies within the random-
maturity no-arbitrage bound, which depends on arbitrageurs’ funding conditions. As
arbitrageurs are likely the marginal investors in all cryptocurrency markets, their time-
varying funding constraints may create common time-series variation inρ across different
cryptocurrencies.
On the other hand, when the deviation lies within the no-arbitrage bound, variations
in demand from the perpetual futures market compared to the spot market will influence
the price deviation. It is plausible that relative demand has common factors across
different cryptocurrencies. For instance, sentiment could drive their common variation,
as perpetual futures allow for high leverage, which attracts overconfident, extrapolative,
and sentiment-driven investors.
Determining which of the two factors better explains the observed price deviation is
an empirical question. To shed light on this, we use past returns as a proxy for relative
extrapolative demand in the perpetual futures market compared to the spot market. Past
returns correlate with the demand from investors with extrapolative beliefs, who are
more likely to trade in the perpetual futures market, given the high leverage it provides.
Therefore, past returns would correlate with the relative demand in the perpetual futures
market compared to the spot.
For the time-varying funding constraint, we consider using crypto return volatility as a
proxy because, as in Adrian and Shin (2010), arbitrageurs likely face Value-at-Risk (VaR)
type constraints, which are more likely to bind when market volatility is high.
Moreover, from Figure 3, we see a downward trend for the magnitude of the deviation.
Kondor (2009)’s model of convergence trading predicts that greater competition among
arbitrageurs reduces the profitability of arbitrage opportunities and deviations approach
a martingale. Therefore, we add a time trend variable to the regression to test if the market
37
===== PAGE 39 =====
becomes more efficient as more arbitrageurs and capital compete in this market.
In sum, the regression models can be represented as:
ρi,t = β0,i + β1(t/365) +β2Ri,t−120:t−1 + β3σi,t−120:t−1 + εi,t, (9)
|ρi,t| = β0,i + β1(t/365) +β2Ri,t−120:t−1 + β3σi,t−120:t−1 + εi,t, (10)
where ρi,t represents the futures-spot deviation, β0,i is the currency fixed effect, t is the
number of days since the beginning of the sample,Ri,t−120:t−1 is the annualized spot return
to currency i over the past 120 days, and σi,t−120:t−1 is the annualized standard deviation
of spot return of currency i over the past 120 days. Since we scale the time trend by the
number of trading days in a year, the regression coefficientβ1 has an interpretation of the
average annual change in the futures-spot deviation.
Table 10 presents the regression results. The regression coefficients on the time trend
are negative and highly significant for bothρ and |ρ|, indicating that the futures-spot gap
has been decreasing both in level and in magnitude over time on average. Throughout
our sample, on average, |ρ| shrinks about 11% per year, which accumulates to over 44%
over the whole sample. This indicates that the perpetual futures market is becoming more
efficient over time.
The coefficients on past returns are positive and highly significant for bothρ and |ρ|.
This suggests that when past returns are high, perpetual futures exhibit a more positive
deviation against the spot. Mapping this back to our second hypothesis, when past returns
are high, the demand for futures relative to the spot is also likely to be high. Consequently,
even after arbitrageurs accommodate the demand outside of trading costs, the residual
demand still manifests itself through the perpetual-spot deviation.
This observation on limits to arbitrage is related to Makarov and Schoar (2020) which
finds that crypto price deviations across international exchanges tend to comove with one
38
===== PAGE 40 =====
Dependent Variable: ρ |ρ|
Time -0.23*** -0.14*** -0.25*** -0.11*** -0.08*** -0.10***
(-4.52) (-3.53) (-6.47) (-5.22) (-4.88) (-5.00)
Ret 0.13*** 0.20*** 0.05*** 0.06***
(4.52) (10.43) (4.07) (5.00)
Vol -0.04*** -0.01
(-6.02) (-1.50)
Currency FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
R2 0.09 0.26 0.33 0.07 0.13 0.14
N 7235 7235 7235 7235 7235 7235
Table 10 Regression of the futures-spot gap against explanatory variables
We present regression results ofρ and |ρ| on a time trend (Time) measured in units of years, past
120 days’ annualized returns (Ret), and volatility (Vol) in the spot market. We add a currency fixed
effect to the regression and consider three specifications: (1) regressing ρ/|ρ| on the time trend,
(2) regressing ρ/|ρ| on past returns, and (3) regressing ρ/|ρ| on past returns and volatility. The
observations are at a daily frequency. The sample period spans from January 8, 2020 to March 11,
2024, totaling 1,495 days. The table also reports theR2 values for each regression model. We report
Newey-West t-statistics in parentheses with a lag of 120 days.∗ p < .1, ∗ ∗p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < .01.
another. The driving force behind this comovement is investors’ buying pressure across
various countries, with cross-country capital controls serving as the primary impediment
to arbitrage capital. In the context of perpetual futures, end-user demand contributes
to the comovement of different cryptocurrencies. The limits to arbitrage predominantly
manifest in the form of trading frictions.
Liu and Tsyvinski (2021) document a significant time-series momentum pattern in
the crypto market. Given that positive past returns lead to a positive gap between
futures and spot prices, it is worth examining further whether the time-series momentum
phenomenon is driven by margin trading and price pressure from the perpetual futures
market. We leave this as an open question for future research.
We find that volatility does not significantly covary with|ρ|. This suggests that time-
varying funding constraints of arbitrageurs do not drive the comovement in futures-spot
deviations across different cryptocurrencies.
39
===== PAGE 41 =====
In summary, a prerequisite for the gap between futures and spot prices to occur is the
existence of trading costs for arbitrageurs. Arbitrage trading will accommodate all the
demand in the futures until the price deviation is within a trading cost bound. Within
the bound, the relative demand of futures compared to the spot will still manifest itself in
the deviation of futures prices from the spot. Due to the comovement of the time-varying
relative demand, we observe a significant common factor in crypto future-spot deviations.
6 Conclusion
Perpetual futures play an important role in today’s crypto markets and could potentially be
adopted in non-crypto markets in the future. Understanding the fundamental mechanism
of this financial derivative is a crucial first step for understanding speculation and hedging
dynamics in this fast-evolving area. We provide a comprehensive analysis of the arbitrage
and funding rate payment mechanisms that underpin perpetual futures.
In an ideal, frictionless world, we show that arbitrageurs would trade perpetual futures
in such a way that a constant proportional relationship would hold between the futures
price and the spot price. In the presence of trading costs, the deviation of the futures price
from the spot would lie within a bound.
Motivated by our theory, we empirically examine the comovement of the futures-
spot spread across different cryptocurrencies and implement a theory-motivated arbitrage
strategy. We find that this simple strategy yields substantial Sharpe ratios across various
trading cost scenarios. The evidence supports our theoretical argument that perpetual
futures-spot spreads exceeding trading costs represent a random-maturity arbitrage op-
portunity.
Finally, we provide an explanation for the common comovement in futures-spot
spreads across different crypto-currencies: arbitrageurs can only accommodate market
40
===== PAGE 42 =====
demand if the price deviation exceeds trading costs. As a result, the overall sentiment in
the futures market relative to the spot market is reflected in the spread. Our empirical
findings suggest that past return momentum can account for a significant portion of the
time-series variation in the futures-spot spread.
41
===== PAGE 43 =====
References
Ackerer, Damien, Julien Hugonnier, and Urban J. Jermann, 2023, Perpetual Futures
Pricing, Working paper.
Adams, Hayden, Noah Zinsmeister, Moody Salem, River Keefer, and Dan Robinson, 2021,
Uniswap v3 core, Whitepaper.
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2010, Liquidity and leverage, Journal of financial
intermediation 19, 418–437.
Alexander, Carol, Jaehyuk Choi, Heungju Park, and Sungbin Sohn, 2020, Bitmex bitcoin
derivatives: Price discovery, informational efficiency, and hedging effectiveness,Journal
of Futures Markets40, 23–43.
Amiram, Dan, Evgeny Lyandres, and Daniel Rabetti, 2021, Cooking the order books:
Information manipulation and competition among crypto exchanges, Working Paper.
Angeris, Guillermo, Tarun Chitra, Alex Evans, and Matthew Lorig, 2022, A primer on
perpetuals, Working Paper.
Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding
liquidity, The review of financial studies22, 2201–2238.
Christin, Nicolas, Bryan R Routledge, Kyle Soska, and Ariel Zetlin-Jones, 2022, The crypto
carry trade, Working Paper.
Cochrane, John, 2009, Asset pricing: Revised edition (Princeton university press).
Cong, Lin William, Zhiheng He, and Ke Tang, 2022a, Staking, token pricing, and crypto
carry, Working Paper.
Cong, Lin William, George Andrew Karolyi, Ke Tang, and Weiyi Zhao, 2022b, Value
premium, network adoption, and factor pricing of crypto assets, Working Paper.
Cong, Lin William, Xi Li, Ke Tang, and Yang Yang, 2022c, Crypto wash trading, Working
Paper.
Cox, John C, Jonathan E Ingersoll Jr, and Stephen A Ross, 1981, The relation between
forward prices and futures prices,Journal of Financial Economics9, 321–346.
De Blasis, Riccardo, and Alexander Webb, 2022, Arbitrage, contract design, and market
structure in bitcoin futures markets,Journal of Futures Markets42, 492–524.
42
===== PAGE 44 =====
Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2018, Deviations from Covered
Interest Rate Parity,Journal of Finance 73, 915–957.
Duffie, Darrell, 2010, Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving
capital, The Journal of finance 65, 1237–1267.
Ferko, Alex, Amani Moin, Esen Onur, and Michael Penick, 2022, Who trades bitcoin
futures and why?,Global Finance Journal 100778.
Garleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2011, Margin-based asset pricing and
deviations from the law of one price,The Review of Financial Studies24, 1980–2022.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Narasimhan Jegadeesh, 1996, Relative pricing of eurodollar futures
and forward contracts,The journal of finance 51, 1499–1522.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2018, The dynamics of financially constrained
arbitrage, The Journal of Finance73, 1713–1750.
Hertzog, Eyal, Guy Benartzi, Galia Benartzi, and Omri Ross, 2017, Bancor protocol, con-
tinuous liquidity for cryptographic tokens through their smart contracts, Whitepaper.
Koijen, Ralph SJ, Tobias J Moskowitz, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Evert B Vrugt, 2018, Carry,
Journal of Financial Economics127, 197–225.
Kondor, P´eter, 2009, Risk in Dynamic Arbitrage: The Price Effects of Convergence Trading,
Journal of Finance 64, 631–655.
Kozak, Serhiy, Stefan Nagel, and Shrihari Santosh, 2018, Interpreting factor models, The
Journal of Finance 73, 1183–1223.
Liu, Yukun, and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2021, Risks and returns of cryptocurrency,The Review of
Financial Studies 34, 2689–2727.
Liu, Yukun, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Xi Wu, 2022, Common risk factors in cryptocurrency,The
Journal of Finance 77, 1133–1177.
Lucca, David O, and Emanuel Moench, 2015, The pre-fomc announcement drift, The
Journal of finance 70, 329–371.
Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2011, Common risk factors in
currency markets, The Review of Financial Studies24, 3731–3777.
43
===== PAGE 45 =====
Makarov, Igor, and Antoinette Schoar, 2020, Trading and arbitrage in cryptocurrency
markets, Journal of Financial Economics135, 293–319.
Pedersen, Lasse Heje, 2019, Efficiently inefficient: how smart money invests and market prices
are determined (Princeton University Press).
Schmeling, Maik, Andreas Schrimpf, and Karamfil Todorov, 2022, Crypto carry, Working
Paper.
Shiller, Robert J, 1993, Measuring asset values for cash settlement in derivative markets:
hedonic repeated measures indices and perpetual futures,The Journal of Finance48, 911–
931.
Streltsov, Artem, and Qihong Ruan, 2022, Perpetual price discovery and crypto market
quality, Working Paper.
44
===== PAGE 46 =====
Appendix
A. Additional Figures
Figure 5 Trading view of BTC perpetual futures on Binance
This figure presents the perpetual futures trading view on Binance. The key information includes
the futures price (Mark), spot price (Index), real-time funding rate based on the rolling average
of the past 8 hours’ observations, and countdown toward funding rate payment (Funding /
Countdown) (illustrated with a red rectangle). In this example, futures are trading at a lower
price than the spot. The funding rate is negative and is to be paid in 1 hour and 12 minutes.
45
===== PAGE 47 =====
Figure 6 Trading costs tiers for the spot market
This figure presents the trading cost tiers for the crypto spot market from Binance:https://www.
binance.com/en/fee/trading. Our high, medium, and low trading cost specification corresponds
to VIP 1, VIP 5, and VIP 8 tiers, as illustrated with red rectangles in the picture. The 30-day trading
volume requirements for VIP 1, 5, and 8 are 1 million, 150 million, and 2 billion, respectively, in the
spot market. We consider the trading costs for makers as institutions typically trade maker orders.
Binance offers a temporary discount for VIP 4-8 to have the same trading cost as VIP 9. We consider
the non-discounted trading costs to make the comparison more reliable and fair.
46
===== PAGE 48 =====
Figure 7 Trading costs tiers for the perp market
This figure presents the trading cost tiers for the crypto perpetual market from Binance: https:
//www.binance.com/en/fee/trading. Our high, medium, and low trading cost specification
corresponds to VIP 1, VIP 5, and VIP 8 tiers, as illustrated with red rectangles in the picture. The
30-day trading volume requirements for VIP 1, 5, and 8 are 15 million, 1 billion, and 12.5 billion,
respectively, in the perpetual market. We consider the trading costs for makers as institutions
typically trade maker orders.
47
===== PAGE 49 =====
2020-07 2021-01 2021-07 2022-01 2022-07 2023-01 2023-07 2024-01
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40Annualized interest rate, percent
supply rate
borrow rate
Figure 8 Annualized interest rate from Aave
This figure presents the daily supply and borrowing rate from Aave. We consider three stablecoins:
USDT, USDC, and DAI. Each day, we take the average interest rate of the three crypto stablecoins
to get the proxy for the risk-free funding rate of the arbitrageurs. The averaging removes the
idiosyncratic noise in borrowing and supply in individual stablecoins. The sample period is from
2020-01-08 to 2024-03-11.
48
===== PAGE 50 =====
Figure 9 Trading Strategy Visualization: Random-maturity Arbitrage
This figure presents the random-maturity arbitrage strategy motivated by the theory. The orange,
green, and purple lines correspond to the open-position threshold under high, medium, and low
trading costs. The red line represents the close-position threshold.
49
===== PAGE 51 =====
B. Funding Rate Calculation on Binance
In this section, we discuss in more detail the funding rate mechanism on the Binance
platform based on the methodology given on the Binance website.10
There are five general steps in obtaining the funding rate. The first step is to find
the Impact Bid/Ask Price Series in a given funding period by analyzing the order book
and determining the average fill price to execute a certain notional value (Impact Margin
Notional) on the bid and ask sides.
The impact margin notional is defined as the notional available to trade with a margin
of 200 USD. So it can be calculated using the following equation:
IMN = 200/Initial margin rate at maximum leverage level.
Given the definition of impact margin notional, the impact bid/ask price is defined
as the average trade price after a market sell/buy order with the total quoted notional
quantity given by the IMN.
Given impact bid and ask prices (denoted as IBP and IAP , respectively), the second
step is to calculate the premium index (denoted as P) series every 5 seconds using the
following equation:
P = [Max(0,IBP −Price Index) −Max(0,Price Index−IAP)]/Price Index,
where ‘Price Index’ is the weighted average spot price of the underlying asset listed on
major spot exchanges.
The rationale behind this formula is to capture the relative difference between the
perpetual contract’s price and the underlying asset’s price, taking into account the actual
market liquidity and depth represented by the IBP and IAP.
The third step is to calculate the time-weighted average premium index over the
funding period (8 hours for Binance) using the premium index series:
¯P =
T
∑
t=1
wtPt/
T
∑
t=1
wt,
where Pt denotes the t-th 5-second in the 8-hour funding period, wt = t is the weight for
10https://www.binance.com/en/support/faq/360033525031
50
===== PAGE 52 =====
each observation, andT is the total number of 5-second intervals within the 8-hour period.
For Binance, T = 12 × 6 × 8 = 5760. With this weighting scheme, the observations closer
to the funding rate payment receive larger weights. The weights decrease linearly in time
over the 8-hour interval.
Given the average premium index, the fourth step is to calculate the funding rate using
the equation below:
f r = ¯P +clamp(γ − ¯P, −0.05%, 0.05%),
where fr is the funding rate,γ is the interest component set by Binance, and
clamp(x,min,max) =



min, if x < min
x, if min ≤ x ≤ max
max, if x > max
Empirically, for Binance futures, the interest rate r is fixed at 0.01% per 8 hours for most
perpetual futures. Figure 10 plots the funding rate as a function of the premium index.
As can be seen when the premium index is close to the interest rate 0.01%, the funding is
fixed at the interest rate.
Figure 10 Funding Rate Function
This figure plots funding rate as a function of the average premium index.
This design allows the funding rate to be fixed to a constant positive rate under normal
market conditions. When markets are relatively stable and the perpetual contract price is
51
===== PAGE 53 =====
trading close to the index price, the premium index will be small. The clamp ensures that
under these normal conditions, the funding rate matches the pre-defined interest rate set
by the exchange. This makes funding rate payments more predictable.
Note that this still allows larger funding rates when there are significant deviations. If
the premium index differs from the interest rate by more than 0.05% in either direction,
the clamp will not cap the funding rate. Larger premiums or discounts in the contract
price will flow through to correspondingly larger funding payments to incentivize price
convergence.
Last but not least, the fifth step is to apply a Capped Funding Rate based on the
maximum leverage of the contract. For contracts with a maximum leverage of 30x or above,
the cap and floor are determined by the Maintenance Margin Ratio. For contracts with a
maximum leverage of 25x or below, the cap and floor are fixed at±3%. For contracts with
higher leverage, the cap and floor can expand based on maximum leverage.
For this design, extremely high funding rates can lead to significant losses for traders
holding positions, especially those with high leverage. By capping the funding rate,
Binance limits the potential downside from holding a position during volatile periods.
This can help prevent accounts from being liquidated due to surging funding costs.
52
===== PAGE 54 =====
C. Data-driven Arbitrage Strategy
In the main text of our paper, we demonstrate the profitability of a simple theory-
motivated trading strategy. The trading threshold can also be potentially further improved
using a data-driven approach. In this part, we implement a data-driven two-threshold ar-
bitrage trading strategy in the perpetual futures market. The strategy can be characterized
with a tuple of two thresholds: (u, l), where u denotes the upper bar and l denotes the
lower bar, u > l. When ρ > u, we long the spot and short the futures. When −l < ρ < l,
we close the position. When ρ < −u, we long the futures and short the spot. Figure 11
presents an illustration of the strategy for Bitcoin with the trading thresholds estimated
using real-time data.
2020-09 2021-01 2021-05 2021-09 2022-01 2022-05 2022-09 2023-01 2023-05 2023-09 2024-01
-300%
-200%
-100%
0%
100%
200%
300%
400%
Annualized percentage point deviation, 
BTC
open
close
Figure 11 Data-driven strategy: Bitcoin, high trading costs
This figure presents real-time trading thresholds of the arbitrage strategy we implement for BTC
under high trading costs. Each blue dot in the figure represents the hourly deviation of futures
from the spot ρ = κ( f − s) − r. The number is annualized for ease of interpretation. The orange
line is the open-position threshold, and the red line is the close-position threshold.
To determine the optimal(u, l), at the beginning of each month, we calculate the returns
of the two-threshold trading strategy based on the past six months’ data on a grid of
parameters. From Table 3, we find the theory implied bounds for price deviation across
all trading costs specifications lie within −200% to +200%. So we choose the grid as
increasing from 0% to 200% with an incremental step of 10% for u and l (u ≥ l). In total,
53
===== PAGE 55 =====
there are 210 model specifications. We choose the model that delivers the highest Sharpe
Ratio in the validation sample of the past six months.
Figure 11 presents the real-time trading thresholds of our arbitrage strategy for BTC
under high trading costs. To mitigate the trading cost, the strategy automatically chooses
a much lower close-position threshold compared to the open-position threshold. We
also present the visualization of all trading strategies under zero to high trading costs in
appendix Figure 12 to Figure 15. Under no-trading costs, the strategy chooses a low open-
position threshold, and the open- and close-position thresholds coincide with each other.
Since there is no trading cost, the strategy no longer needs to wait for price convergence
to avoid high turnover. On the contrary, with high trading costs, the strategy chooses a
larger open-position threshold and a smaller close-position threshold. This reflects the
automatic adjustment from the algorithm for trading costs and turnovers.
Table 12 and Table 13 present the return statistics for this strategy under high trading
costs over time. In the baseline ‘unrestricted’ strategy, we allow for both (1) longing the
futures and shorting the spot and (2) shorting the futures and longing the spot, while in
the ‘long-spot only’ strategy, we only allow for shorting the futures and longing the spot.
The reason we consider the ‘long-spot only’ strategy is the infrastructure for shorting the
spot is not well-developed. So we want to examine the performance of the trading strategy
in the presence of such limits to arbitrage.
We find the arbitrage trading strategy has a high Sharpe ratio under high trading costs.
The annualized Sharpe ratio for Bitcoin is 2.00 in our sample. They are even higher for
other cryptos. The high Sharpe ratio of the trading strategy corroborates our theoretical
results that when the price deviation is large enough, the trading would be a random-
maturity arbitrage opportunity.
Since the year 2022, the deviation between the futures and the spot has become smaller
and less volatile. There seems to be a structural break. We indeed find the trading strategy
takes less active positions and significantly lower annualized returns. However, when
there is a large enough deviation, the strategy can still generate sizeable Sharpe ratios in
trading.
54
===== PAGE 56 =====
Fee tiers
No Low Medium High
BTC SR 6.33 2.77 2.22 2.00
Return 14.32 6.68 5.57 4.94
Volatility 2.26 2.41 2.51 2.47
MaxDD -1.80 -1.85 -1.87 -1.87
α 15.39 6.96 5.25 4.01
tα 9.82 5.11 3.62 2.84
Active % 36.65 24.44 20.98 16.14
OtC time 5.04 28.54 53.38 69.67
ETH SR 8.58 4.10 3.09 2.59
Return 22.42 10.76 8.55 7.70
Volatility 2.61 2.62 2.77 2.97
MaxDD -2.53 -2.58 -2.54 -2.48
α 28.28 12.83 9.78 8.06
tα 10.43 5.83 4.79 4.06
Active % 42.77 30.56 20.26 18.60
OtC time 3.96 16.43 36.05 38.90
BNB SR 16.72 9.34 6.29 4.79
Return 54.98 29.52 20.12 16.78
Volatility 3.29 3.16 3.20 3.50
MaxDD -1.03 -1.04 -1.04 -1.04
α 72.60 34.02 22.29 18.10
tα 13.40 8.42 6.93 6.40
Active % 47.68 42.75 32.91 29.89
OtC time 3.22 6.06 11.40 18.13
DOGE SR 11.54 7.32 5.03 3.49
Return 71.46 44.53 30.80 21.42
Volatility 6.19 6.08 6.12 6.13
MaxDD -8.56 -8.56 -8.56 -8.56
α 130.81 66.75 40.22 24.59
tα 9.23 6.62 5.41 4.48
Active % 42.50 40.26 30.28 23.12
OtC time 3.19 4.42 6.89 8.61
ADA SR 15.64 8.03 4.49 2.64
Return 53.01 27.35 15.01 11.09
Volatility 3.39 3.41 3.34 4.20
MaxDD -1.81 -1.76 -1.72 -4.35
α 79.44 35.02 17.10 10.78
tα 15.94 11.89 8.01 4.67
Active % 43.68 44.80 28.19 26.60
OtC time 2.98 4.80 9.86 23.57
Table 11 Performance of Data-driven Random Maturity Arbitrage Strategy
Performance under different trading cost tiers. The fees for spot (futures) are 2.25 (0.18) bps, 4.5
(0.72) bps, and 6.75 (1.44) bps for the low, medium, and high trading cost levels. Statistics reported
are the annualized Sharpe ratio, return (%), volatility (%), max drawdown (%), alpha (%), t-stat of
the alpha, proportion of time the strategy is active (%), and average open-to-close (OtC) position
duration in hours. The returns reported are excess returns from the random maturity arbitrage
strategies.
55
===== PAGE 57 =====
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 All
BTC SR 2.34 2.69 -0.02 1.30 6.39 2.00
Return 8.62 8.81 -0.01 1.06 11.85 4.94
Volatility 3.68 3.28 0.29 0.82 1.85 2.47
MaxDD -1.87 -1.63 -0.25 -0.24 -0.68 -1.87
Active % 35.65 18.39 3.78 2.96 37.57 16.14
OtC time 119.54 25.98 7.00 63.75 569.00 69.67
N 8,616 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,578
ETH SR 3.15 3.64 1.38 2.54 1.25 2.59
Return 14.07 13.63 1.25 2.87 2.90 7.70
Volatility 4.47 3.74 0.91 1.13 2.31 2.97
MaxDD -2.48 -1.27 -0.45 -0.34 -0.76 -2.48
Active % 33.26 24.18 3.30 13.23 22.06 18.60
OtC time 55.27 18.71 31.22 192.17 76.00 38.90
N 8,616 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,578
BNB SR 5.99 6.75 2.71 2.76 4.07 4.79
Return 29.62 28.98 4.55 5.86 14.07 16.78
Volatility 4.95 4.30 1.68 2.13 3.45 3.50
MaxDD -1.04 -0.67 -0.57 -0.61 -0.66 -1.04
Active % 49.65 32.48 14.13 20.89 53.45 29.89
OtC time 18.95 9.86 32.49 34.94 57.60 18.13
N 7,815 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 35,777
DOGE SR 4.90 5.90 1.58 0.91 1.71 3.49
Return 59.81 46.48 1.55 0.65 6.94 21.42
Volatility 12.20 7.88 0.98 0.71 4.07 6.13
MaxDD -8.56 -2.09 -0.15 -0.20 -1.69 -8.56
Active % 60.12 39.78 9.60 3.30 17.84 23.12
OtC time 6.20 9.64 8.14 143.50 99.00 8.61
N 4,190 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 32,152
ADA SR 3.51 3.66 1.94 1.26 1.63 2.64
Return 19.27 22.99 2.35 1.42 5.83 11.09
Volatility 5.49 6.28 1.21 1.12 3.58 4.20
MaxDD -1.73 -4.35 -0.36 -0.37 -1.48 -4.35
Active % 43.53 32.92 21.69 10.94 19.86 26.60
OtC time 24.66 19.36 19.19 63.27 111.00 23.57
N 8,055 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,017
Table 12 Performance of Unrestricted Trading Strategy Over Time: Data-driven Strategy,
High Trading Costs Tier
This table presents the Sharpe ratios, annualized returns (%), standard deviations (%), and
active percentages (%) of the random-maturity arbitrage trading strategies for five different
cryptocurrencies with high trading costs. We break down returns for each year and provide
summary statistics across all time. The left panel shows the performance of the unrestricted
trading strategy, where both long and short spot positions are allowed. The right panel shows
the performance of the long-spot-only trading strategy, where shorting the spot is not allowed.
The returns reported are excess returns from the random maturity arbitrage strategies.
56
===== PAGE 58 =====
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 All
BTC SR 1.97 2.54 0.12 -0.24 5.16 1.71
Return 6.05 8.26 0.02 -0.10 9.33 3.81
Volatility 3.07 3.25 0.16 0.41 1.81 2.23
MaxDD -1.87 -1.63 -0.07 -0.54 -0.73 -2.12
Active % 19.74 18.06 0.07 5.68 22.24 11.38
OtC time 61.62 30.05 2.00 33.67 311.00 43.77
N 8,616 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,578
ETH SR 2.75 3.41 0.81 2.77 1.06 2.25
Return 11.96 13.05 0.53 1.32 2.58 6.50
Volatility 4.34 3.83 0.66 0.48 2.43 2.89
MaxDD -2.48 -1.27 -0.26 -0.34 -0.83 -2.48
Active % 31.73 24.47 0.08 6.22 22.06 15.86
OtC time 81.85 22.76 1.33 89.83 76.00 43.27
N 8,616 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,578
BNB SR 4.35 4.87 0.76 0.88 2.17 3.22
Return 13.79 19.32 0.16 0.53 2.90 8.05
Volatility 3.17 3.97 0.21 0.60 1.34 2.50
MaxDD -0.67 -0.72 -0.04 -0.18 -0.51 -0.72
Active % 29.87 25.13 0.07 5.35 9.22 14.44
OtC time 22.08 14.19 2.00 28.31 76.50 18.45
N 7,815 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 35,777
DOGE SR 2.64 5.43 1.19 0.90 1.73 2.46
Return 31.16 30.29 0.30 0.47 7.05 12.90
Volatility 11.80 5.58 0.26 0.52 4.07 5.25
MaxDD -8.56 -1.02 -0.04 -0.23 -1.69 -8.56
Active % 37.49 35.32 0.07 6.15 18.37 17.17
OtC time 7.49 11.53 1.00 48.09 102.00 11.33
N 4,190 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 32,152
ADA SR 2.75 3.13 -0.12 -0.19 2.28 2.06
Return 13.77 19.20 -0.01 -0.13 8.25 8.10
Volatility 5.01 6.14 0.09 0.68 3.62 3.94
MaxDD -1.73 -4.35 -0.04 -0.71 -1.48 -4.35
Active % 32.70 30.97 0.07 5.83 29.37 17.65
OtC time 27.64 23.03 2.00 15.48 164.33 25.62
N 8,055 8,760 8,760 8,760 1,682 36,017
Table 13 Performance of Long-spot-only Trading Strategy Over Time: Data-driven
Strategy, High Trading Costs Tier
This table presents the Sharpe ratios, annualized returns (%), standard deviations (%), and
active percentages (%) of the random-maturity arbitrage trading strategies for five different
cryptocurrencies with high trading costs. We break down returns for each year and provide
summary statistics across all time. The left panel shows the performance of the unrestricted
trading strategy, where both long and short spot positions are allowed. The right panel shows
the performance of the long-spot-only trading strategy, where shorting the spot is not allowed.
The returns reported are excess returns from the random maturity arbitrage strategies.
57
===== PAGE 59 =====
The conclusion and results remain similar if we consider ‘long-spot only’ trading
strategies where only shorting the futures and longing the spot is allowed. Considering
this one-sided trade slightly lowers the Sharpe ratio, but the algorithm automatically
adjusts by increasing the proportion of times being active. The resulting annualized
returns increase. In the year 2022, since most of the time, the futures price is below the
spot and we don’t allow longing the futures and shorting the spot trade, the proportion of
time the strategy is active is very low.
Table 11 further reports the performance of the trading strategy under different trading
costs specifications laid out in Table 2. The results from Table 12 correspond to the last
column in Table 11. As trading costs increase, our trading strategy dynamically adjusts
by lowering the proportion of time being active. The annualized return decreases and
annualized standard deviation are of similar magnitude across different trading costs. As
a result, SR decreases as trading costs increase. Under no trading cost, we see a Sharpe
ratio of 6.72 for BTC and Sharpe ratios above 10 for all other cryptos. This also confirms
our theoretical results that when there is no trading cost, any deviation of perpetual price
from the no-arbitrage benchmark would be a random-maturity arbitrage opportunity.
Comparing Table 11 with Table 6, we find under low and no trading costs, the potential
incremental benefits from using a data-driven two-threshold trading rule are much larger
compared to higher trading costs. The intuition can be easily illustrated by comparing
the empirical real-time trading thresholds in the theory-motivated strategy and the data-
driven strategy under low trading costs (Figure 9 and Figure 12). With persistent ρ the
data-driven approach can find the optimal close-position threshold corresponding to the
level of ρ while the theory-motivated one is too conservative in setting a close-position
threshold equal to 0.
There are two sources of trading profit for our trading strategy: (1) the price conver-
gence; (2) the funding rate payment. In Table 14, we decompose the return to our trading
strategy without trading cost into the two sources. We find across different cryptos, the
return from price convergence accounts for a larger proportion of the total profit. For BTC,
the price convergence accounts for more than2/3 of the profits, and for ETH, it accounts for
about 3/4. Additionally, the decomposition for the year 2022 generates different patterns,
the return due to funding rate plays a much smaller role across different cryptos. This
is because the deviation from perpetual to spot is much smaller during the year. The
results suggest when more sophisticated arbitrageurs enter the market, the large deviation
of perpetual from the spot would be more of an off-equilibrium outcome. As a result, the
funding rate payment will also be small.
58
===== PAGE 60 =====
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 All
BTC Return 19.76 25.69 4.12 8.77 9.29 14.32
Price 12.54 16.09 3.92 9.17 4.69 10.16
Funding 7.22 9.60 0.19 -0.40 4.60 4.16
ETH Return 34.93 30.99 15.60 10.63 10.70 22.42
Price 25.47 21.85 14.78 10.32 6.02 17.52
Funding 9.46 9.14 0.82 0.31 4.68 4.90
BNB Return 83.60 64.93 34.20 43.47 38.35 54.98
Price 71.21 56.63 29.55 38.36 26.95 47.32
Funding 12.39 8.30 4.65 5.11 11.41 7.66
DOGE Return 220.81 95.90 42.48 16.71 8.31 71.46
Price 214.72 82.67 42.22 17.03 3.43 66.83
Funding 6.09 13.22 0.26 -0.32 4.88 4.64
ADA Return 78.31 56.21 53.01 34.28 12.65 53.01
Price 67.04 45.69 51.71 33.96 6.96 47.27
Funding 11.27 10.52 1.30 0.32 5.69 5.74
Table 14 Data-driven strategy: Price Convergence vs Funding Rate Payment
This table decomposes the portfolio return into the part due to price convergence and the part due
to funding rate payment.
In all, our analysis of the trading strategy demonstrates the profitability of perpetual-
spot arbitrage trade. The deviation of the futures to spot can also serve as an important
measure for the frictions, trading costs, and limits to arbitrage in the market.
59
===== PAGE 61 =====
Figure 12 Trading Strategy Visualization: No Trading Costs
This figure presents the real-time trading thresholds under no trading costs. The orange line is the
open-position threshold, and the red line is the close-position threshold. The trading thresholds
are determined based on the adjusted SR from the past six months.
60
===== PAGE 62 =====
Figure 13 Trading Strategy Visualization: Low Trading Costs
This figure presents the real-time trading thresholds under low trading costs (2.25 bps for spot
trading and 0.18 bp for futures trading). The orange line is the open-position threshold, and the red
line is the close-position threshold. The trading thresholds are determined based on the adjusted
SR from the past six months.
61
===== PAGE 63 =====
Figure 14 Trading Strategy Visualization: Medium Trading Costs
This figure presents the real-time trading thresholds under medium trading costs (4.5 bps for spot
trading and 0.72 bp for futures trading). The orange line is the open-position threshold, and the red
line is the close-position threshold. The trading thresholds are determined based on the adjusted
SR from the past six months.
62
===== PAGE 64 =====
Figure 15 Trading Strategy Visualization: High Trading Costs
This figure presents the real-time trading thresholds under high trading costs (6.75 bps for spot
trading and 1.44 bps for futures trading). The orange line is the open-position threshold, and
the red line is the close-position threshold. The trading thresholds are determined based on the
adjusted SR from the past six months.
63